Talk 1.

Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Volume I

15th May, 1935
A wandering monk (sannyasi) was trying to clear his doubt: “How
to realise that all the world is God?”
Maharshi: If you make your outlook that of wisdom, you will find the
world to be God. Without knowing the Supreme Spirit (Brahman),
how will you find His all-pervasiveness?
Talk 2.
Someone enquired about the nature of perception.
M.: Whatever state one is in, the perceptions partake of that state.
The explanation is that in the waking state (jagrat) the gross body
perceives gross names and forms; in swapna (the dream state) the
mental body perceives the mental creations in their manifold forms
and names; in the sushupti (deep dreamless sleep), the identification
with the body being lost, there are no perceptions; similarly in the
Transcendental state identity with Brahman places the man in
harmony with everything, and there is nothing apart from his Self.
Talk 3.
A question was asked as to the nature of happiness.
M.: If a man thinks that his happiness is due to external causes and
his possessions, it is reasonable to conclude that his happiness must
increase with the increase of possessions and diminish in proportion
to their diminution. Therefore if he is devoid of possessions, his
happiness should be nil. What is the real experience of man? Does
it conform to this view?
In deep sleep the man is devoid of possessions, including his own
body. Instead of being unhappy he is quite happy. Everyone desires

to sleep soundly. The conclusion is that happiness is inherent in
man and is not due to external causes. One must realise his Self in
order to open the store of unalloyed happiness.
Talk 4.
Maharshi was asked by an educated young man: “How do you say
that the Heart is on the right, whereas the biologists have found it to
be on the left?” The man asked for authority.
M.: Quite so. The physical organ is on the left; that is not denied. But
the Heart of which I speak is non-physical and is only on the right
side. It is my experience, no authority is required by me. Still you
can find confirmation in a Malayalam Ayurvedic book and in Sita
Upanishad; and he produced the quotation (mantra) from the latter
and repeated the text (sloka) from the former.
Talk 5.
Mr. M. Frydman, an engineer, remarked on the subject of Grace, “A salt
doll diving into the sea will not be protected by a waterproof coat”.
It was a very happy simile and was applauded as such. Maharshi
added, “The body is the waterproof coat”.
Talk 6.
A question was asked by a monk (sannyasi) about how to prevent the
mind from being distracted.
M.: You see the objects on forgetting your own Self. If you keep hold
of your Self, you will not see the objective world.
Talk 7.
When asked if occult powers (siddhis) can be achieved along
with Omnipotence (Iswaratva) as mentioned in the last verse of
Dakshinamurti Ashtakam, Maharshi said: “Let Omnipotence (Iswaratva)
be accomplished first and then the other question may be raised.”
Talk 8.
“Can anyone get any benefit by repeating sacred syllables (mantras)
picked up casually?
M.: “No. He must be competent and initiated in such mantras.”
Maharshi illustrated this by the following story: A King visited

his Premier in his residence. There he was told that the Premier
was engaged in repetition of sacred syllables (japa). The King
waited for him and, on meeting him, asked what the japa was.
The Premier said that it was the holiest of all, Gayatri. The King
desired to be initiated by the Premier. But the Premier confessed his
inability to initiate him. Therefore the King learned it from someone
else, and meeting the Minister later he repeated the Gayatri and
wanted to know if it was right. The Minister said that the mantra
was correct, but it was not proper for him to say it. When pressed
for an explanation, the Minister called to a page close by and
ordered him to take hold of the King. The order was not obeyed.
The order was often repeated, and still not obeyed. The King flew
into a rage and ordered the same man to hold the Minister, and
it was immediately done. The Minister laughed and said that the
incident was the explanation required by the King. “How?” asked
the King. The Minister replied, “The order was the same and the
executor also, but the authority was different. When I ordered, the
effect was nil, whereas, when you ordered, there was immediate
effect. Similarly with mantras.”
Talk 9.
Someone enquired: Why is it said in scriptures that the Sage is like
a child?
M.: A child and a Sage (Jnani) are similar in a way. Incidents interest
a child only so long as they last. It ceases to think of them after they
have passed away. So then, it is apparent that they do not leave any
impression on the child and it is not affected by them mentally. So
it is with a Sage.
Talk 10.
A visitor asked how to realise oneself in accordance with Maharshi’s
instructions, contained in his text of Truth Revealed, verse 9,
supplement. The difficulty was in controlling the mind.
M.: It is to be done by controlling the breath. If you practise it by yourself
without other help, then the mind is controlled. Otherwise the mind
comes under control spontaneously in the presence of a superior power.
Such is the greatness of association with the wise (satsanga).

Talk 11.
“Can destiny (karma) ever come to an end?”
M.: The karmas carry the seeds of their own destruction in themselves.
Talk 12.
A man asked the Maharshi to say something to him. When asked what
he wanted to know, he said that he knew nothing and wanted to hear
something from the Maharshi.
M.: You know that you know nothing. Find out that knowledge. That
is liberation (mukti).

Talk 13.
6th January, 1935
Mrs. M. A. Piggot, an English lady, who had read “Search in Secret
India”, came to see the Maharshi. The services of a disciple as interpreter
were provided. There were many visitors at the time in the hall, including
some ladies with their infants. The place resounded with noise. At length
silence prevailed. Suddenly Maharshi, who seemed to be looking at
infinite space, was heard to say softly, “Monkey”! A little baby was then
discovered in the doorway (unobserved by the mother who was seated
on the other side of the door) with a large monkey standing on his hind
legs, who with both hands was fondling the child not hurting it in the
slightest, both being at peace with each other in Maharshi’s presence.
When Maharshi’s voice was heard the monkey jumped away adroitly
and disappeared. The incident greatly impressed the lady.

7th January, 1935
“Is a Master necessary for realisation?” Mrs. Piggot asked first.
M.: The realisation is the result of the Master’s grace more than
teachings, lectures, meditation, etc. They are only secondary aids,
whereas the former is the primary and the essential cause.
Devotee: What are the obstacles which hinder realisation of the Self?
M.: They are habits of mind (vasanas).
D.: How to overcome the mental habits (vasanas)?

M.: By realising the Self.
D.: That is a vicious circle.
M.: It is the ego which raises such difficulties, creating obstacles and
then suffers from the perplexity of apparent paradoxes. Find out
who makes the enquiries and the Self will be found.
D.: What are the aids for realisation?
M.: The teachings of the Scriptures and of realised souls
D.: Can such teachings be discussions, lectures and meditations?
M.: Yes, all these are only secondary aids, whereas the essential is
the Master’s grace.
D.: How long will it take for one to get that?
M.: Why do you desire to know?
D.: To give me hope.
M.: Even such a desire is an obstacle. The Self is ever there, there
is nothing without it. Be the Self and the desires and doubts will
disappear. Such Self is the witness in sleep, dream and waking states
of existence. These states belong to the ego. The Self transcends
even the ego. Did you not exist in sleep? Did you know then that you
were asleep or unaware of the world? It is only in the waking state
that you describe the experience of sleep as being unawareness;
therefore the consciousness when asleep is the same as that when
awake. If you know what this waking consciousness is, you will
know the consciousness which witnesses all the three states. Such
consciousness could be found by seeking the consciousness as it
was in sleep.
D.: In that case, I fall asleep.
M.: No harm!
D.: It is a blank.
M.: For whom is the blank? Find out. You cannot deny yourself at any
time. The Self is ever there and continues in all states.
D.: Should I remain as if in sleep and be watchful at the same time?
M.: Yes. Watchfulness is the waking state. Therefore the state will
not be one of sleep, but sleepless sleep. If you go the way of your

thoughts you will be carried away by them and you will find
yourself in an endless maze.
D.: So, then, I must go back tracing the source of thoughts.
M.: Quite so; in that way the thoughts will disappear and the Self alone
will remain. In fact there is no inside or outside for the Self. They
are also projections of the ego. The Self is pure and absolute.
D.: It is understood intellectually only. Is not intellect a help for
realisation?
M.: Yes, up to a certain stage. Even so, realise that the Self transcends
the intellect — the latter must itself vanish to reach the Self.
D.: Does my realisation help others?
M.: Yes, certainly. It is the best help possible. But there are no
others to be helped. For a realised being sees the Self, just like
a goldsmith estimating the gold in various jewels. When you
identify yourself with the body then only the forms and shapes
are there. But when you transcend your body the others disappear
along with your body-consciousness.
D.: Is it so with plants, trees, etc.?
M.: Do they exist at all apart from the Self? Find it out. You think
that you see them. The thought is projected out from your Self.
Find out wherefrom it rises. Thoughts will cease to rise and the
Self alone will remain.
D.: I understand theoretically. But they are still there.
M.: Yes. It is like a cinema-show. There is the light on the screen and
the shadows flitting across impress the audience as the enactment of
some piece. Similarly also will it be, if in the same play an audience
also is shown. The seer, the seen, will then only be the screen. Apply
it to yourself. You are the screen, the Self has created the ego, the
ego has its accretions of thoughts which are displayed as the world,
the trees, plants, etc., of which you are asking. In reality, all these
are nothing but the Self. If you see the Self, the same will be found
to be all, everywhere and always. Nothing but the Self exists.
D.: Yes, I still understand only theoretically. Yet the answers are simple
and beautiful and convincing.
M.: Even the thought, “I do not realise” is a hindrance. In fact, the
Self alone is.

Talk 14.
8th January, 1935
An old man came and sat in the hall. Maharshi was reading Sarma’s
Sanskrit recension of Arunachala Akshara Manamalai (the first of
The Five Hymns to Arunachala). The man asked softly: “It is said
that realisation is beyond expression; and expression always fails to
describe the realisation. How is it?”
M.: The point has been mentioned in Arunachala Ashtakam, Verse
three where it is admitted that, although the expression of realisation
is impossible, still its existence is indicated.
Soon after there were visible signs of emotion in the man. His
breath was deep and hard and he fell on the floor prostrating humbly
and got up only after one or two minutes. Remaining calm a brief
while, he left the place. Evidently the man had some illumination.
He sought confirmation from Maharshi, who responded fittingly.
He found confirmation, and humbly and feelingly acknowledged
the divine intercession on his behalf.
Talk 15.
A question was asked about the Upanishadic passage, “The Supreme
Spirit is subtler than the subtlest and larger than the largest.”
M.: Even the structure of the atom has been found by the mind.
Therefore the mind is subtler than the atom. That which is behind
the mind, namely the individual soul, is subtler than the mind.
Further, the Tamil saint Manickavachagar has said of the specks
dancing in a beam of sunlight, that if each represents a universe,
the whole sunlight will represent the Supreme Being.

Talk 16.
19th January, 1935
Mr. Douglas Ainslie (Mr. Grant Duff), an aristocratic English gentleman,
70 years old, nephew of a former Governor of Madras, an author and poet
formerly attached to the British Legation in Athens, Paris and The Hague,
had come to Madras as a guest of Government House. He came to see

Maharshi with a letter of introduction from Paul Brunton. Next day he
returned and remained a little less than an hour in the hall. On both days
practically no words were exchanged, only gaze meeting gaze. His habits
are abstemious; he remains without food of any kind till 1 p.m. and then
lunches; he is said to have coffee and biscuits in the evening and retires
without any further food. He has been a bachelor all along, walks a few
miles a day on an empty stomach, speaks little and is very graceful in
his movements. His voice is low and soft and his words appear to come
from the heart. He has friends among whom might be counted the late
Sir John Woodroffe, Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Prof. Thomas,
Sanskrit Professor in Oxford University. He expressed a desire to hear the
Vedas. On Monday a letter arrived from Riga and the questions therein
happened to coincide with the questions the European visitor had asked
relating to the existence of departed souls and how best to serve them.
The reply sent to Riga was read out to him. Tamil songs from
Maharshi’s “Truth Revealed” and the Vedas were repeated in his
presence. He considered the recitations magnificent. He came the
next afternoon and to the wonder of others, had an experience on
the previous night which he repeated to Maharshi. It was that he
had seen something like an electric light within himself in the heart
centre on the right side. And he added further that he had seen the sun
shining within. Maharshi smiled a little and then had a translation of
“Atmavidya” (Self-Knowledge) read out to him wherein there is the
cryptic saying that realisation consists in reaching the Atman (Self)
which is the expanse of consciousness (chidvyoman) as distinguished
from the mind, which is the expansion of chittavyoman. This
explanation appealed to him.
Speaking of him later, Maharshi remarked, “Just think of an old man
of 70 not choosing to live peacefully in his own house on the income
he had earned! How intense has been his earnestness that he has left
his native land, dared a sea-voyage of 6,000 miles, and faced the
hardships of long railway journeys in a foreign land, ignorant of the
language, undergoing the vicissitudes of a lonely life, submitting to
the inclemency of a hot climate, in surroundings uncongenial and
unaccustomed to him. He could have been happy in his own house.
It is his longing for internal peace that has brought him here.” Quite

so! The intensity of his earnestness is revealed by his illuminating
experiences here within four days of his arrival, people say.
With regard to the question concerning departed souls: so long as a man
identifies himself with his gross body the thought materialised as gross
manifestations must be real to him. Because his body is imagined to have
originated from another physical being, the other exists as truly as his
own body. Having existed here once it certainly survives death, because
the offspring is still here and feels he has been born of the other. Under
these circumstances the other world is true; and the departed souls are
benefited by prayers offered for them. On the other hand, considered in
a different way, the One Reality is the Self from whom has sprung the
ego which contains within itself the seeds of predispositions acquired in
previous births. The Self illumines the ego, the predispositions and also
the gross senses, whereupon the predispositions appear to the senses to
have materialised as the universe, and become perceptible to the ego, the
reflection of the Self. The ego identifies itself with the body, and so loses
sight of the Self and the result of this inadvertence is dark ignorance and
the misery of the present life. The fact of the ego rising from the Self and
forgetting it, is birth. So, it may be said that the birth of the individual has
killed the mother. The present desire to regain one’s mother is in reality
the desire to regain the Self, which is the same as realising one-self, or
the death of the ego; this is surrender unto the mother, so she may live
eternally.
Maharshi then read out from the Tamil version of Yoga Vasishta the
story of Deerga Tapasi who had two sons, Punya and Papa. After the
death of the parents the younger one mourned the loss and the elder
brother consoled him as follows: “Why do you mourn the loss of our
parents? I shall tell you where they are; they are only within ourselves
and are ourselves. For the life-current has passed through innumerable
incarnations, births and deaths, pleasures and pains, etc., just as the
water current in a river flows over rocks, pits, sands, elevations and
depressions on its way, but still the current is unaffected. Again the
pleasures and pains, births and deaths, are like undulations on the
surface of seeming water in the mirage of the ego. The only reality is
the Self from where the ego appears, and runs through thoughts which
manifest themselves as the universe and in which the mothers and

fathers, friends and relatives appear and disappear. They are nothing but
manifestations of the Self so that one’s parents are not outside the Self.
So there is no reason to mourn. Learn it, realise it and be happy.”

Talk 17.
24th January, 1935
Mr. W. Y. Evans-Wentz, an English research scholar of Oxford
University, brought a letter of introduction from Mr. Brunton and
arrived on a visit.
He was tired after his journey and required rest. He is quite accustomed
to Indian ways of living, having visited this country several times. He
has learned the Tibetan language and helped in the translation of the
“Book of the Dead” and the “Life of Milarepa”, the greatest of Tibetan
Yogis, and a third book on the “Tibetan Secret Doctrines.”
In the afternoon he began to ask a few questions. They related to Yoga.
He wanted to know if it was right to kill animals such as tigers, deer,
etc., and use the skin for Yoga posture (asana).
M.: The mind is the tiger or the deer.
D.: If everything be illusion, then one can take lives?
M.: To whom is illusion? Find that out! In fact everyone is a “killer
of the Self” (atmahan) every moment of his life.
D.: Which posture (asana) is the best?
M.: Any asana, possibly sukha asana (easy posture or the half-Buddha
position). But that is immaterial for jnana, the Path of Knowledge.
D.: Does posture indicate the temperament?
M.: Yes.
D.: What are the properties and effects of the tiger’s skin, wool, or
deer-skin, etc.?
M.: Some have found them out and related them in Yoga books. They
correspond to conductors and non-conductors of magnetism, etc.
But it is all immaterial for the Path of Knowledge (Jnana Marga).
Posture really means location and steadfastness in the Self. It is
internal. The others refer to external positions.

D.: Which time is most suitable for meditation?
M.: What is time?
D.: Tell me what it is!
M.: Time is only an idea. There is only the Reality Whatever you
think it is, it looks like that. If you call it time, it is time. If you
call it existence, it is existence, and so on. After calling it time, you
divide it into days and nights, months, years, hours, minutes, etc.
Time is immaterial for the Path of Knowledge. But some of these
rules and discipline are good for beginners.
D.: What is Jnana Marga?
M.: Concentration of the mind is in a way common to both Knowledge
and Yoga. Yoga aims at union of the individual with the universal,
the Reality. This Reality cannot be new. It must exist even now,
and it does exist.
Therefore the Path of Knowledge tries to find out how viyoga
(separation) came about. The separation is from the Reality only.
D.: What is illusion?
M.: To whom is the illusion? Find it out. Then illusion will vanish.
Generally people want to know about illusion and do not examine
to whom it is. It is foolish. Illusion is outside and unknown. But
the seeker is considered to be known and is inside. Find out what
is immediate, intimate, instead of trying to find out what is distant
and unknown.
D.: Does Maharshi advise any physical posture for the Europeans?
M.: It may be advisable. However, it must be clearly understood that
meditation is not prohibited in the absence of asanas, or prescribed
times, or any accessories of the kind.
D.: Does Maharshi have any particular method to impart to the
Europeans in particular?
M.: It is according to the mental equipment of the individual. There
is indeed no hard and fast rule.
Mr. Evans-Wentz began to ask questions, mostly relating to Yoga
preliminaries, for all of which Maharshi replied that they are aids to
Yoga, which is itself an aid to Self-realisation, the goal of all.

D.: Is work an obstruction to Self-realisation?
M.: No. For a realised being the Self alone is the Reality, and actions
are only phenomenal, not affecting the Self. Even when he acts he
has no sense of being an agent. His actions are only involuntary
and he remains a witness to them without any attachment.
There is no aim for this action. Even one who is still practising
the path of Wisdom (jnana) can practise while engaged in work. It
may be difficult in the earlier stages for a beginner, but after some
practice it will soon be effective and the work will not be found a
hindrance to meditation.
D.: What is the practice?
M.: Constant search for ‘I’, the source of the ego. Find out ‘Who am I?’
The pure ‘I’ is the reality, the Absolute Existence-Consciousness-Bliss.
When That is forgotten, all miseries crop up; when that is
held fast, the miseries do not affect the person.
D.: Is not brahmacharya (celibacy) necessary for realisation of the Self?
M.: Brahmacharya is ‘living in Brahman’. It has no connection with
celibacy as commonly understood. A real brahmachari, that is one
who lives in Brahman, finds bliss in the Brahman which is the
same as the Self. Why then should you look for other sources of
happiness? In fact the emergence from the Self has been the cause
of all the misery.
D.: Celibacy is a sine qua non for Yoga?
M.: So it is. Celibacy is certainly an aid to realisation among so many
other aids.
D.: Is it then not indispensable? Can a married man realise the Self?
M.: Certainly, it is a matter of fitness of mind. Married or unmarried,
a man can realise the Self, because that is here and now. If it were
not so, but attainable by some efforts at some other time, and if it
were new and something to be acquired, it would not be worthy of
pursuit. Because what is not natural cannot be permanent either.
But what I say is that the Self is here and now and alone.
D.: God being immanent in all, one should not take life of any kind. Is
society right in taking the life of a murderer? Can the State do so either?
The Christian countries begin to think that it is wrong to do so.

M.: What is it that prompted the murderer to commit the crime? The
same power awards him the punishment. Society or the State is
only a tool in the hands of the power. You speak of one life taken
away; But what about innumerable lives lost in wars?
D.: Quite so. Loss of lives is wrong anyway. Are wars justified?
M.: For a realised man, the one who remains ever in the Self, the loss
of one or several or all lives either in this world or in all the three
worlds makes no difference. Even if he happens to destroy them
all, no sin can touch such a pure soul. Maharshi quoted the Gita,
Chapter 18, Verse 17 - “He who is free from the notion of ego,
whose intellect is unattached, though he annihilates all the worlds,
he slayeth not, nor is he bound by the results of his actions.”
D.: Do not one’s actions affect the person in after-births?
M.: Are you born now? Why do you think of other births? The fact
is that there is neither birth nor death. Let him who is born think
of death and palliatives therefore.
D.: How long did it take Maharshi to realise the Self?
M.: This question is asked because the name and form are perceived.
These are the perceptions consequent on the identification of the
ego with the gross body.
If the ego identifies itself with the subtle mind, as in dream, the
perceptions are subtle also. But in sleep there are no perceptions.
Was there not the ego still? Unless it was, there cannot be the
memory of having slept. Who was it that slept? You did not say in
your sleep that you slept. You say it now in your wakeful state. The
ego therefore is the same in wakefulness, dream and sleep. Find
out the underlying Reality behind these states. That is the Reality
underlying these. In that state there is Being alone. There is no you,
nor I, nor he; no present, nor past, nor future. It is beyond time and
space, beyond expression.
It is ever there.
Just as a plantain tree produces shoots at its roots, before yielding
fruits and perishing, and these shoots, being transplanted, do the
same again, so also the original primeval Master of antiquity
(Dakshinamurti), who cleared the doubts of his rishi disciples in
silence, has left shoots which are ever multiplying. The Guru is

a shoot of that Dakshinamurti. The question does not arise when
the Self is realised.
D.: Does Maharshi enter the nirvikalpa samadhi?
M.: If the eyes are closed, it is nirvikalpa; if open, it is (though
differentiated, still in absolute repose) savikalpa. The ever-present
state is the natural state sahaja.

Talk 18.
26th January, 1935
Mr. Evans-Wentz asked: There are yogis with occult powers. What
does Maharshi think of them?
M.: The powers are known by hearsay or by exhibition. Thus they
are in the realm of the mind only.
D.: Mr. Brunton mentions a yogi in Madras who is said to hold
communion with his master in the Himalayas.
M.: It is not more marvellous than telepathy - so commonly known.
Telepathy cannot exist without the hearer and television without
the seer. What is the difference between hearing from far and from
near? It is only the hearer who matters. Without the hearer there
cannot be hearing; without the seer there cannot be vision.
D.: So you want me to consider the subject and not the object.
M.: The subject and object appear only after the mind has arisen. The
mind comprises them and also the occult powers.
D.: Can the manifestations of light (jothis) be seen on Arunachala Hill?
M.: Yes.
D.: Is there any psychic effect in visiting sacred places like Mt.
Kailas, Benares, etc.?
M.: Yes.
D.: Is there any benefit accruing by dying in Benares?
M.: Yes, the meaning will be clear if the real Benares and real dying
be understood.
D.: You mean that they are in the Self?
M.: Yes.

D.: There are six centres in the body and there are corresponding
centres in the world.
M.: Yes. What is in the world is in the body; and what is in the body
is in the world also.
D.: Is the sacredness of Benares a matter of faith, or is it externally
also real?
M.: Both.
D.: Some people are attracted to one place of pilgrimage and others
to another. Is it according to their temperaments?
M.: Yes. Just consider how all of you born in different places and
living in other lands are gathered here today? What is the Force
which has attracted you here? If this is understood the other Force
is also understood.

Talk 19.
29th January, 1935
Mr. Grant Duff asked: Where are memory and forgetfulness located?
M.: In the mind (chitta).

Talk 20.
30th January, 1935
Mr. Evans-Wentz: Is solitude necessary for a Jnani?
M.: Solitude is in the mind of man. One might be in the thick of the
world and maintain serenity of mind; such a one is in solitude.
Another may stay in a forest, but still be unable to control his mind.
He cannot be said to be in solitude. Solitude is a function of the
mind. A man attached to desire cannot get solitude wherever he
may be; a detached man is always in solitude.
D.: So then, one might be engaged in work and be free from desire
and keep up solitude. Is it so?
M.: Yes. Work performed with attachment is a shackle, whereas work
performed with detachment does not affect the doer. He is, even
while working, in solitude.

D.: They say that there are many saints in Tibet who remain in solitude
and are still very helpful to the world. How can it be?
M.: It can be so. Realisation of the Self is the greatest help that can be
rendered to humanity. Therefore, the saints are said to be helpful,
though they remain in forests. But it should not be forgotten that
solitude is not in forests only. It can be had even in towns, in the
thick of worldly occupations.
D.: It is not necessary that the saints should mix with people and be
helpful to them?
M.: The Self alone is the Reality; the world and the rest of it are not. The
realised being does not see the world as different from himself.
D.: Thus then, the saint’s realisation leads to the uplift of humanity
without the latter being aware of it. Is it so?
M.: Yes. The help is imperceptible but is still there. A saint helps the
whole of humanity, unknown to the latter.
D.: Would it not be better if he mixed with others?
M.: There are no others to mix with. The Self is the one and only
Reality.
D.: If there be a hundred Self-realised men will it not be to the greater
benefit of the world?
M.: When you say ‘Self’ you refer to the unlimited, but when you add
‘men’ to it, you limit the meaning. There is only one Infinite Self.
D.: Yes, yes, I see! Sri Krishna has said in the Gita that work must
be performed without attachment and such work is better than
idleness. Is it Karma Yoga?
M.: What is said is given out to suit the temperament of the hearers.
D.: In Europe it is not understood by the people that a man in solitude
can be helpful. They imagine that men working in the world can
alone be useful. When will this confusion cease? Will the European
mind continue wading in the morass or will it realise the truth?
M.: Never mind Europe or America. Where are they except in your
mind? Realise your Self and then all is realised.
If you dream and see several men, and then wake up and recall
your dream, do you try to ascertain if the persons of your dream
creation are also awake?

D.: What does Maharshi think of the theory of universal illusion
(Maya)?
M.: What is Maya? It is only Reality.
D.: Is not Maya illusion?
M.: Maya is used to signify the manifestations of the Reality. Thus
Maya is only Reality.
D.: Some say that Sri Sankaracharya was only intellectual and not
realised. Is it so?
M.: Why worry about Sankaracharya? Realise your own Self. Others
can take care of themselves.
D.: Jesus Christ cured people of their diseases. Is that only an occult
power (siddhi)?
M.: Was Jesus aware at the time that he was curing men of their
diseases? He could not have been conscious of his powers. There
is a story related as follows: Jesus had once cured a man of his
blindness. The man turned wicked, in course of time. Meeting him
after some years, Jesus observed his wickedness and asked him why
he was so. He replied saying that, when he was blind, he could not
commit any sin. But after Jesus had cured him of blindness he grew
wicked and Jesus was responsible for his wickedness.
D.: Was not Jesus a Perfected Being possessing occult powers (siddhi)?
M.: He could not have been aware of his powers (siddhis).
D.: Is it not good to acquire them, such as telepathy, etc.?
M.: Telepathy or radio enables one to see and hear from afar. They are
all the same, hearing and seeing. Whether one hears from near or
far does not make any difference in hearing. The fundamental factor
is the hearer, the subject. Without the hearer or the seer, there can
be no hearing or seeing. The latter are the functions of the mind.
The occult powers (siddhis) are therefore only in the mind. They
are not natural to the Self. That which is not natural, but acquired,
cannot be permanent, and is not worth striving for.
They denote extended powers. A man is possessed of limited powers
and is miserable; he wants to expand his powers so that he may be
happy. But consider if it will be so; if with limited perceptions one

is miserable, with extended perceptions the misery must increase
proportionately. Occult powers will not bring happiness to anyone,
but will make him all the more miserable!
Moreover what are these powers for? The would-be occultist (siddha)
desires to display the siddhis so that others may appreciate him.
He seeks appreciation, and if it is not forthcoming he will not be
happy. There must be others to appreciate him. He may even find
another possessor of higher powers. That will cause jealousy and
breed unhappiness. The higher occultist (siddha) may meet a still
higher siddha and so on until there will come one who will blow
up everything in a trice. Such is the highest adept (siddha) and He
is God or the Self.
Which is the real power? Is it to increase prosperity or bring
about peace? That which results in peace is the highest perfection
(siddhi).
D.: But common people in Europe and America would not appreciate
such an attitude and would desire a display of powers and
instructions by lectures, etc.
M.: Lectures may entertain individuals for a few hours without
improving them. Silence on the other hand is permanent and
benefits the whole of humanity.
D.: But silence is not understood.
M.: It does not matter. By silence, eloquence is meant. Oral lectures
are not so eloquent as silence. Silence is unceasing eloquence.
The Primal Master, Dakshinamurti, is the ideal. He taught his rishi
disciples by silence.
D.: But then there were disciples for Him. It was all right. Now it is
different. They must be sought after and helped.
M.: That is a sign of ignorance. The power which created you has
created the world. If it can take care of you, it can similarly take
care of the world also.
D.: What does Bhagavan think of the “lost soul” mentioned by
Jesus Christ?
M.: Think what there is to be lost. Is there anything to lose? What
matters is only that which is natural. Such must be eternal and

cannot be experienced. That which is born must die; that which is
acquired must be lost. Were you born? You are ever existent. The
Self can never be lost.
D.: Buddha advises the eight-fold path as being the best so that none
might be lost.
M.: Yes. Such is called Raja Yoga by the Hindus.
D.: Is yoga advised for a spiritual aspirant?
M.: Yoga helps control of mind.
D.: But does it not lead to occult powers (siddhis) which are said to
be dangerous?
M.: But you qualified your question by the words “a spiritual aspirant”.
You did not mean a seeker of powers (siddhis).

Talk 21.
31st January, 1935
Mr. Ellappa Chettiar, a member of the Legislative Council of
Madras Presidency and an influential Hindu, asked: “Why is it said
that the knowledge born of hearing is not firm, whereas that born of
contemplation is firm?”
M.: On the other hand it is said that hearsay knowledge (paroksha) is
not firm, whereas that born of one’s own realisation (aparoksha)
is firm.
It is also said that hearing helps the intellectual understanding of the
Truth, that meditation makes the understanding clear, and finally
that contemplation brings about realisation of the Truth.
Furthermore, they say also that all such knowledge is not firm and
that it is firm only when it is as clear and intimate as a gooseberry
in the hollow of one’s palm.
There are those who affirm that hearing alone will suffice,
because a competent person who had already, perhaps in previous
incarnations, qualified himself, realises and abides in peace as soon
as he hears the Truth told him only once, whereas the person not
so qualified must pass through the stages prescribed above, before
falling into samadhi.

Talk 22.
Mrs. Piggott returned from Madras for a further visit. She asked
questions relating to diet regulation.
D.: What diet is prescribed for a sadhak (one who is engaged in
spiritual practices)?
M.: Satvic food in limited quantities.
D.: What is satvic food?
M.: Bread, fruits, vegetables, milk, etc.
D.: Some people take fish in North India. May it be done?
No answer was made by the Maharshi.
D.: We Europeans are accustomed to a particular diet; change of diet
affects health and weakens the mind. Is it not necessary to keep
up physical health?
M.: Quite necessary. The weaker the body the stronger the mind grows.
D.: In the absence of our usual diet our health suffers and the mind
loses strength.
M.: What do you mean by strength of mind?
D.: The power to eliminate worldly attachment.
M.: The quality of food influences the mind. The mind feeds on the
food consumed.
D.: Really! How can the Europeans adjust themselves to satvic
food only?
M.: (Pointing to Mr. Evans-Wentz) You have been taking our food.
Do you feel uncomfortable on that account?
Mr. Evans-Wentz: No. Because I am accustomed to it.
D.: What about those not so accustomed?
M.: Habit is only adjustment to the environment. It is the mind
that matters. The fact is that the mind has been trained to think
certain foods tasty and good. The food material is to be had both
in vegetarian and non-vegetarian diet equally well. But the mind
desires such food as it is accustomed to and considers tasty.
D.: Are there restrictions for the realised man in a similar manner?
M.: No. He is steady and not influenced by the food he takes.

D.: Is it not killing life to prepare meat diet?
M.: Ahimsa stands foremost in the code of discipline for the yogis.
D.: Even plants have life.
M.: So too the slabs you sit on!
D.: May we gradually get ourselves accustomed to vegetarian food?
M.: Yes. That is the way.

Talk 23.
2nd February, 1935
Mr. Evans-Wentz continued another day: “May one have more than
one spiritual master?”
M.: Who is a Master? He is the Self after all. According to the stages
of the development of the mind the Self manifests as the Master
externally. The famous ancient saint Avadhuta said that he had
more than 24 Masters. The Master is one from whom one learns
anything. The Guru may be sometimes inanimate also, as in the
case of Avadhuta. God, Guru and the Self are identical.
A spiritual-minded man thinks that God is all-pervading and takes
God for his Guru. Later, God brings him in contact with a personal
Guru and the man recognises him as all in all. Lastly the same man
is made by the grace of the Master to feel that his Self is the Reality
and nothing else. Thus he finds that the Self is the Master.
D.: Does Sri Bhagavan initiate his disciples?
Maharshi kept silent.
Thereafter one of the devotees took it upon himself to answer,
saying, “Maharshi does not see anyone as outside his Self. So
there are no disciples for him. His Grace is all-pervading and He
communicates his Grace to any deserving individual in silence.”
D.: How does book-lore help in Self-Realisation?
A.: Only so far as to make one spiritually-minded.
D.: How far does intellect help?
A.: Only so far as to make one sink the intellect in the ego, and the
ego in the Self.

Talk 24.
4th February, 1935
Mrs. Piggott: Why do you take milk, but not eggs?
M.: The domesticated cows yield more milk than necessary for their
calves and they find it a pleasure to be relieved of the milk.
D.: But the hen cannot contain the eggs?
M.: But there are potential lives in them.
D.: Thoughts cease suddenly, then ‘I-I’ rises up as suddenly and
continues. It is only in the feeling and not in the intellect. Can it
be right?
M.: It is certainly right. Thoughts must cease and reason disappear
for ‘I-I’ to rise up and be felt. Feeling is the prime factor and not
reason.
D.: Moreover it is not in the head but in the right side of the chest.
M.: It ought to be so. Because the heart is there.
D.: When I see outside it disappears. What is to be done?
M.: It must be held tight.
D.: If one is active with such remembrance, will the actions be always
right?
M.: They ought to be. However, such a person is not concerned with
the right or wrong of his actions. Such a person’s actions are God’s
and therefore they must be right.
D.: Why then the restrictions of food given for such?
M.: Your present experience is due to the influence of the
atmosphere you are in. Can you have it outside this atmosphere?
The experience is spasmodic. Until it becomes permanent
practice is necessary. Restrictions of food are aids for such
experience to be repeated. After one gets established in truth
the restrictions drop away naturally. Moreover, food influences
the mind and it must be kept pure.
The lady told a disciple later: “I feel the vibrations from him
more intensely and I am able to reach the ‘I’ centre more readily
than before.”

Talk 25.
On a former occasion B. V. Narasimha Swami, author of Self-Realization,
asked: Who am I? How is it to be found?
M.: Ask yourself the question. The body (annamaya kosa) and its
functions are not ‘I’.
Going deeper, the mind (manomaya kosa) and its functions are not
‘I’.
The next step takes on to the question. “Wherefrom do these
thoughts arise?” The thoughts are spontaneous, superficial or
analytical. They operate in intellect. Then, who is aware of them?
The existence of thoughts, their clear conceptions and their
operations become evident to the individual. The analysis leads to
the conclusion that the individuality of the person is operative as
the perceiver of the existence of thoughts and of their sequence.
This individuality is the ego, or as people say ‘I’. Vijnanamaya kosa
(intellect) is only the sheath of ‘I’ and not the ‘I’ itself.
Enquiring further the questions arise, “Who is this ‘I’? Wherefrom
does it come?” ‘I’ was not aware in sleep. Simultaneously with its rise
sleep changes to dream or wakefulness. But I am not concerned with
dream just now. Who am I now, in the wakeful state? If I originated
from sleep, then the ‘I’ was covered up with ignorance. Such an
ignorant ‘I’ cannot be what the scriptures say or the wise ones affirm.
‘I’ am beyond even ‘Sleep’; ‘I’ must be now and here and what I
was all along in sleep and dreams also, without the qualities of such
states. ‘I’ must therefore be the unqualified substratum underlying
these three states (anandamaya kosa transcended).
‘I’ is, in brief, beyond the five sheaths. Next, the residuum left over
after discarding all that is not-self is the Self, Sat-Chit-Ananda.
D.: How is that Self to be known or realised?
M.: Transcend the present plane of relativity. A separate being (Self)
appears to know something apart from itself (non-Self). That is, the
subject is aware of the object. The seer is drik; the seen is drisya.
There must be a unity underlying these two, which arises as ‘ego’.
This ego is of the nature of chit (intelligence); achit (insentient
object) is only negation of chit. Therefore the underlying essence

is akin to the subject and not the object. Seeking the drik, until all
drisya disappears, the drik will become subtler and subtler until the
absolute drik alone survives. This process is called drisya vilaya
(the disappearance of the objective world).
D.: Why should the objects drisya be eliminated? Cannot the Truth
be realised even keeping the object as it is?
M.: No. Elimination of drisya means elimination of separate identities
of the subject and object. The object is unreal. All drisya (including
ego) is the object. Eliminating the unreal, the Reality survives.
When a rope is mistaken for a snake, it is enough to remove the
erroneous perception of the snake for the truth to be revealed.
Without such elimination the truth will not dawn.
D.: When and how is the disappearance of the objective world (drisya
vilaya) to be effected?
M.: It is complete when the relative subject, namely the mind, is
eliminated. The mind is the creator of the subject and the object
and is the cause of the dualistic idea. Therefore, it is the cause of
the wrong notion of limited self and the misery consequent on
such erroneous idea.
D.: What is this mind?
M.: Mind is one form of manifestation of life. A block of wood or a
subtle machine is not called mind. The vital force manifests as
life-activity and also as the conscious phenomena known as the mind.
D.: What is the relation between mind and object? Is the mind
contacting something different from it, viz., the world?
M.: The world is ‘sensed’ in the waking and the dream states or is the
object of perception and thought, both being mental activities. If
there were no such activities as waking and dreaming thought, there
would be no ‘perception’ or inference of a ‘world’. In sleep there is
no such activity and ‘objects and world’ do not exist for us in sleep.
Hence ‘reality of the world’ may be created by the ego by its act
of emergence from sleep; and that reality may be swallowed up or
disappear by the soul resuming its nature in sleep. The emergence
and disappearance of the world are like the spider producing a
gossamer web and then withdrawing it. The spider here underlies

all the three states - waking, dreaming, and sleep; such a spider in
the person is called Atman (Self), whereas the same with reference
to the world (which is considered to issue from the sun) is called
Brahman (Supreme Spirit). He that is in man is the same as He that
is in the sun. (Sa yaschayam purushe yaschasavaditye sa ekah).
While Self or Spirit is unmanifest and inactive, there are no relative
doubles; e.g., subject and object - drik and drisya. If the enquiry
into the ultimate cause of manifestation of mind itself is pushed on,
mind will be found to be only the manifestation of the Real which is
otherwise called Atman or Brahman. The mind is termed sukshma
sarira or ‘subtle-body’; and jiva is the individual soul. The jiva is
the essence of the growth of individuality; personality is referred
to as jiva. Thought or mind is said to be its phase, or one of the
ways in which the jiva manifests itself - the earlier stage or phase
of such manifestation being vegetative life. This mind is always
seen as being related to, or acting on, some non-mind or matter,
and never by itself. Therefore mind and matter co-exist.
Talk 26.
D.: How shall we discover the nature of the mind i.e., its ultimate
cause, or the noumenon of which it is a manifestation?
M.: Arranging thoughts in the order of value, the ‘I’ thought is
the all-important thought. Personality-idea or thought is also the root or the
stem of all other thoughts, since each idea or thought arises only as
someone’s thought and is not known to exist independently of the
ego. The ego therefore exhibits thought-activity. The second and
the third persons do not appear except to the first person. Therefore
they arise only after the first person appears, so all the three persons
seem to rise and sink together. Trace, then, the ultimate cause of ‘I’
or personality. The ‘I’ idea arises to an embodied ego and should
be related to a body or organism. Has it a location in the body or a
special relation to any particular spot, as speech which has its centre
in the brain or amativeness in the brain? Similarly, has ‘I’ got any
centre in the brain, blood, or viscera? Thought-life is seen to centre
round the brain and the spinal-cord which in turn are fed by the
blood circulating in them, carrying food and air duly mixed up which
are transformed into nerve matter. Thus, vegetative life - including

circulation, respiration, alimentation, etc. - or vital force, is said
to be (or reside in) the core or essence of the organism. Thus the
mind may be regarded as the manifestation of vital force which
again may be conceived as residing the Heart.
D.: Now for the art of eliminating the mind and developing intuition
in its stead, are they two distinct stages with a possible neutral
ground which is neither mind nor intuition? Or does the absence
of mental activity necessarily involve Self-Realisation?
M.: To the abhyasi (practitioner) there are two distinctive stages.
There is a neutral ground of sleep, coma, faint, insanity, etc., in
which the mental operations either do not exist or consciousness
of Self does not prevail.
D.: Taking the first part first, how is the mind to be eliminated or
relative consciousness transcended?
M.: The mind is by nature restless. Begin liberating it from its
restlessness; give it peace; make it free from distractions; train
it to look inward; make this a habit. This is done by ignoring the
external world and removing the obstacles to peace of mind.
D.: How is restlessness removed from the mind?
M.: External contacts - contacts with objects other than itself - make the
mind restless. Loss of interest in non-Self, (vairagya) is the first step.
Then the habits of introspection and concentration follow. They are
characterised by control of external senses, internal faculties, etc.
(sama, dama, etc.) ending in samadhi (undistracted mind).
Talk 27.
D.: How are they practised?
M.: An examination of the ephemeral nature of external phenomena
leads to vairagya. Hence enquiry (vichara) is the first and foremost
step to be taken. When vichara continues automatically, it results
in a contempt for wealth, fame, ease, pleasure, etc. The ‘I’ thought
becomes clearer for inspection. The source of ‘I’ is the Heart - the
final goal. If, however, the aspirant is not temperamentally suited
to Vichara Marga (to the introspective analytical method), he
must develop bhakti (devotion) to an ideal - may be God, Guru,
humanity in general, ethical laws, or even the idea of beauty. When

one of these takes possession of the individual, other attachments
grow weaker, i.e., dispassion (vairagya) develops. Attachment for
the ideal simultaneously grows and finally holds the field. Thus
ekagrata (concentration) grows simultaneously and imperceptibly
- with or without visions and direct aids.
In the absence of enquiry and devotion, the natural sedative
pranayama (breath regulation) may be tried. This is known as
Yoga Marga. If life is imperilled the whole interest centres round
the one point, the saving of life. If the breath is held the mind
cannot afford to (and does not) jump at its pets - external objects.
Thus there is rest for the mind so long as the breath is held. All
attention being turned on breath or its regulation, other interests are
lost. Again, passions are attended with irregular breathing, whereas
calm and happiness are attended with slow and regular breathing.
Paroxysm of joy is in fact as painful as one of pain, and both are
accompanied by ruffled breaths. Real peace is happiness. Pleasures
do not form happiness. The mind improves by practice and becomes
finer just as the razor’s edge is sharpened by stropping. The mind
is then better able to tackle internal or external problems. If an
aspirant be unsuited temperamentally for the first two methods
and circumstantially (on account of age) for the third method,
he must try the Karma Marga (doing good deeds, for example,
social service). His nobler instincts become more evident and he
derives impersonal pleasure. His smaller self is less assertive and
has a chance of expanding its good side. The man becomes duly
equipped for one of the three aforesaid paths. His intuition may
also develop directly by this single method.
D.: Can a line of thought or a series of questions induce Self-hypnotism?
Should it not be reduced to a single point analysing the
unanalysable, elementary and vaguely perceived and elusive ‘I’?
M.: Yes. It is really like gazing into vacancy or a dazzling crystal or
light.
D.: Can the mind be fixed to that point? How?
M.: If the mind is distracted, ask the question promptly, “To whom
do these distracting thoughts arise?” That takes you back to the
‘I’ point promptly.

D.: How long can the mind stay or be kept in the Heart?
M.: The period extends by practice.
D.: What happens at the end of the period?
M.: The mind returns to the present normal state. Unity in the Heart
is replaced by variety of phenomena perceived. This is called the
outgoing mind. The heart-going mind is called the resting mind.
D.: Is all this process merely intellectual or does it exhibit feeling
predominantly?
M.: The latter.
D.: How do all thoughts cease when the mind is in the Heart?
M.: By force of will, with strong faith in the truth of the Master’s
teaching to that effect.
D.: What is the good of this process?
M..:
(a) Conquest of the will - development of concentration.
(b) Conquest of passions - development of dispassion.
(c) Increased practice of virtue - (samatva) equality to all.
D.: Why should one adopt this self-hypnotism by thinking on the
unthinkable point? Why not adopt other methods like gazing into
light, holding the breath, hearing music, hearing internal sounds,
repetition of the sacred syllable (Pranava) or other mantras?
M.: Light-gazing stupefies the mind and produces catalepsy of the
will for the time being, yet secures no permanent benefit. Breath
control benumbs the will for the time being only. Sound-hearing
produces similar results - unless the mantra is sacred and secures
the help of a higher power to purify and raise the thoughts.
Talk 28.
D.: What is the interrelation between regulation of thought and
regulation of breath?
M.: Thought (intellectual) and respiration, circulation, etc. (vegetative)
activities are both different aspects of the same - the individual life.
Both depend upon (or metaphorically ‘reside’ or ‘inhere’ in) life.
Personality and other ideas spring from it like the vital activity.
If respiration or other vital activity is forcibly repressed, thought

also is repressed. If thought is forcibly slowed down and pinned
to a point, the vital activity of respiration is slowed down, made
even and confined to the lowest level compatible with life. In both
cases the distracting variety of thought is temporarily at an end.
The interaction is noticeable in other ways also. Take the will to
live. That is thought-power. That sustains and keeps up life when
other vitality is almost exhausted and delays death. In the absence
of such will-power death is accelerated. So thought is said to carry
life with it in the flesh and from one fleshy body to another.
D.: Are there any aids to (1) concentration and (2) casting off
distractions?
M.: Physically the digestive and other organs are kept free from
irritation. Therefore food is regulated both in quantity and quality.
Non-irritants are eaten, avoiding chillies, excess of salt, onions,
wine, opium, etc. Avoid constipation, drowsiness and excitement,
and all foods which induce them. Mentally take interest in one
thing and fix the mind on it. Let such interest be all-absorbing
to the exclusion of everything else. This is dispassion (vairagya)
and concentration. God or mantra may be chosen. The mind gains
strength to grasp the subtle and merge into it.
D.: Distractions result from inherited tendencies. Can they be cast
off too?
M.: Yes. Many have done so. Believe it! They did so because they
believed they could. Vasanas (predispositions) can be obliterated.
It is done by concentration on that which is free from vasanas and
yet is their core.
D.: How long is the practice to continue?
M.: Till success is achieved and until yoga-liberation becomes
permanent. Success begets success. If one distraction is conquered
the next is conquered and so on, until all are finally conquered. The
process is like reducing an enemy’s fort by slaying its man-power
- one by one, as each issues out.
D.: What is the goal of this process?
M.: Realising the Real.
D.: What is the nature of the Reality?

M.: (a) Existence without beginning or end - eternal.
(b) Existence everywhere, endless, infinite.
(c) Existence underlying all forms, all changes, all forces, all matter
and all spirit.
The many change and pass away (phenomena), whereas the One
always endures (noumenon).
(d) The one displacing the triads, i.e., the knower, the knowledge
and the known. The triads are only appearances in time and space,
whereas the Reality lies beyond and behind them. They are like a
mirage over the Reality. They are the result of delusion.
D.: If ‘I’ also be an illusion, who then casts off the illusion?
M.: The ‘I’ casts off the illusion of ‘I’ and yet remains as ‘I’. Such
is the paradox of Self-Realisation. The realised do not see any
contradiction in it. Take the case of bhakti - I approach Iswara and
pray to be absorbed in Him. I then surrender myself in faith and by
concentration. What remains afterwards? In place of the original
‘I’, perfect self-surrender leaves a residuum of God in which the ‘I’
is lost. This is the highest form of devotion (parabhakti), prapatti,
surrender or the height of vairagya.
You give up this and that of ‘my’ possessions. If you give up ‘I’
and ‘Mine’ instead, all are given up at a stroke. The very seed of
possession is lost. Thus the evil is nipped in the bud or crushed in
the germ itself. Dispassion (vairagya) must be very strong to do
this. Eagerness to do it must be equal to that of a man kept under
water trying to rise up to the surface for his life.
D.: Cannot this trouble and difficulty be lessened with the aid of a
Master or an Ishta Devata (God chosen for worship)? Cannot they
give the power to see our Self as it is - to change us into themselves
- to take us into Self-Realisation?
M.: Ishta Devata and Guru are aids - very powerful aids on this path.
But an aid to be effective requires your effort also. Your effort is a
sine qua non. It is you who should see the sun. Can spectacles and
the sun see for you? You yourself have to see your true nature. Not
much aid is required for doing it!
D.: What is the relation between my free-will and the overwhelming
might of the Omnipotent?

(a) Is omniscience of God consistent with ego’s freewill?
(b) Is omnipotence of God consistent with ego’s freewill?
(c) Are the natural laws consistent with God’s free-will?
M.: Yes. Free-will is the present appearing to a limited faculty of
sight and will. The same ego sees its past activity as falling into a
course of ‘law’ or rules - its own free-will being one of the links
in that course of law.
Omnipotence and omniscience of God are then seen by the ego to
have acted through the appearance of his own free-will. So he comes
to the conclusion that the ego must go by appearances. Natural laws
are manifestations of God’s will and they have been laid down.
D.: Is the study of science, psychology, physiology, philosophy, etc.
helpful for:(1) this art of yoga-liberation.
(2) the intuitive grasp of the unity of the Real?
M.: Very little. Some knowledge is needed for yoga and it may be
found in books. But practical application is the thing needed, and
personal example, personal touch and personal instructions are the
most helpful aids. As for the other, a person may laboriously convince
himself of the truth to be intuited, i.e., its function and nature, but the
actual intuition is akin to feeling and requires practice and personal
contact. Mere book learning is not of any great use. After realisation
all intellectual loads are useless burdens and are thrown overboard
as jetsam. Jettisoning the ego is necessary and natural.
D.: How does dream differ from waking?
M.: In dreams one takes on different bodies, and they re-enter this
body when one dreams of sense-contacts.
D.: What is happiness? Is it inhering in the Atman or in the object, or
in the contact between the subject and the object? But we do not
see happiness in our affairs. When does It actually arise?
M.: When there is contact of a desirable sort or memory thereof,
and when there is freedom from undesirable contacts or memory
thereof, we say there is happiness. Such happiness is relative and
is better called pleasure.

But men want absolute and permanent happiness. This does not
reside in objects, but in the Absolute. It is Peace free from pain
and pleasure - it is a neutral state.
D.: In what sense is happiness our real nature?
M.: Perfect Bliss is Brahman. Perfect Peace is of the Self. That alone
exists and is conscious. The same conclusion is arrived at: (a)
judged metaphysically, and (b) inferred by Bhakti Marga (Path
of Devotion).
We pray to God for Bliss and receive it by Grace. The bestower of bliss
must be Bliss itself and also Infinite. Therefore, Iswara is the Personal
God of infinite power and bliss. Brahman is Bliss, impersonal and
absolute. The finite egos, deriving their source from Brahman and then
Iswara, are in their spiritual nature bliss only. Biologically, an organism
functions because such functions are attended with happiness.
It is pleasure that helps our growth; food, exercise, rest, and
gregarious qualities. The psychology (and metaphysics) of pleasure
is perhaps this; Our nature is primarily one, entire, blissful. Take
this as a probable hypothesis. Creation is by the entire Godhead
breaking into God and Nature (maya or prakriti). This maya is
of two parts: (para) - the supporting essence and (apara) the five
elements, mind, intellect, and ego (eightfold).
Ego’s perfection is suddenly broken at a point and a want is felt
giving rise to a desire to get something or do something. When
that want is cured by the fulfilment of that desire, the ego is happy
and the original perfection is restored. Therefore happiness may
be said to be our natural condition or nature. Pleasure and pain are
relative and refer to our finite state, with progress by satisfaction
of want. If relative progress is stopped and the soul merges into
Brahman - of the nature of perfect peace - that soul ceases to have
relative, temporary pleasure and enjoys perfect peace - Bliss. Hence
Self-Realisation is Bliss; it is realizing the Self as the limitless
spiritual eye (jnana dristi) and not clairvoyance; it is the highest
self-surrender. Samsara (the world-cycle) is sorrow.
D.: Why then is samsara - creation and manifestation as finitised - so
full of sorrow and evil?
M.: God’s will!

D.: Why does God will it so?
M.: It is inscrutable. No motive can be attributed to that Power -
no desire, no end to achieve can be asserted of that one Infinite,
All-wise and All-powerful Being. God is untouched by activities,
which take place in His presence; compare the sun and the world
activities. There is no meaning in attributing responsibility and
motive to the One before it becomes many. But God’s will for
the prescribed course of events is a good solution of the free-will
problem (vexata quaestio). If the mind is restless on account of a
sense of the imperfect and unsatisfactory character of what befalls
us or what is committed or omitted by us, then it is wise to drop the
sense of responsibility and free-will by regarding ourselves as the
ordained instruments of the All-wise and All-powerful, to do and
suffer as He pleases. He carries all burdens and gives us peace.
Talk 29.
On another occasion, the evening was calm and cloudy. It was drizzling
occasionally and somewhat cool in consequence. The windows of the
Asramam Hall were closed and Maharshi was seated as usual on the sofa.
Facing him sat the devotees. Some visitors had come from Cuddalore. A
Sub-Judge, accompanied by two elderly ladies, was among them. The
Sub-Judge began the discussion as to the impermanence of all mundane
things, by putting the question. “Has the discrimination between Reality
and Unreality (Sat asat vicharana) the efficacy in itself to lead us to
the realisation of the one Imperishable?”
M.: As propounded by all and realised by all true seekers, fixity in
the Supreme Spirit (Brahma nishta) alone can make us know and
realise it. It being of us and in us, any amount of discrimination
(vivechana) can lead us only one step forward, by making us
renouncers, by goading us to discard the seeming (abhasa) as
transitory and to hold fast to the eternal truth and presence alone.
The conversation turned upon the question as to whether Iswara
Prasad (Divine Grace) is necessary for the attaining of samrajya
(universal dominion) or whether a jiva’s honest and strenuous efforts
to attain it cannot of themselves lead him to That from whence is no
return to life and death. The Maharshi with an ineffable smile which

lit up His Holy Face and which was all-pervasive, shining upon the
coterie around him, replied in tones of certainty and with the ring
of truth; “Divine Grace is essential for Realisation. It leads one to
God-realisation. But such Grace is vouchsafed only to him who is
a true devotee or a yogin, who has striven hard and ceaselessly on
the path towards freedom.”
D.: There are six centres mentioned in the Yoga books; but the jiva
is said to reside in the Heart. Is it not so?
M.: Yes. The jiva is said to remain in the Heart in deep sleep; and in
the brain in the waking state. The Heart need not be taken to be the
muscular cavity with four chambers which propels blood. There are
indeed passages which support the view. There are others who take it
to mean a set of ganglia or nerve centres about that region. Whichever
view is correct does not matter to us. We are not concerned with
anything less than ourselves. That we have certainly within us. There
could be no doubts or discussions about that.
The Heart is used in the Vedas and the scriptures to denote the place
whence the notion ‘I’ springs. Does it spring only from the fleshy ball?
It springs within us somewhere right in the middle of our being. The
‘I’ has no location. Everything is the Self. There is nothing but that.
So the Heart must be said to be the entire body of ourselves and of the
entire universe, conceived as ‘I’. But to help the practiser (abhyasi)
we have to indicate a definite part of the Universe, or of the Body.
So this Heart is pointed out as the seat of the Self. But in truth we
are everywhere, we are all that is, and there is nothing else.
D.: It is said that Divine Grace is necessary to attain successful
undistracted mind (samadhi). Is that so?
M.: We are God (Iswara). Iswara Drishti (i.e., seeing ourselves as God)
is itself Divine Grace. So we need Divine Grace to get God’s Grace.
Maharshi smiles and all devotees laugh together.
D.: There is also Divine Favour (Iswara anugraham) as distinct from
Divine Grace (Iswara prasadam). Is that so?
M.: The thought of God is Divine Favour! He is by nature Grace
(prasad or arul). It is by God’s Grace that you think of God.
D.: Is not the Master’s Grace the result of God’s Grace?

M.: Why distinguish between the two? The Master is the same as God
and not different from him.
D.: When an endeavour is made to lead the right life and to concentrate
thought on the Self, there is often a downfall and break. What is
to be done?
M.: It will come all right in the end. There is the steady impulse of
your determination that sets you on your feet again after every
downfall and breakdown. Gradually the obstacles are all overcome
and your current becomes stronger. Everything comes right in the
end. Steady determination is what is required.
Talk 30.
Mr. N. Natesa Iyer, the leader of the Bar in a South Indian town, an
orthodox Brahmin, asked: “Are the gods Iswara or Vishnu and their
sacred regions Kailasa or Vaikuntha real?
M.: As real as you are in this body.
D.: Do they possess a vyavahara satya, i.e., phenomenal existence,
like my body? Or are they fictions like the horn of a hare?
M.: They do exist.
D.: If so, they must be somewhere. Where are they?
M.: Persons who have seen them say that they exist somewhere. So
we must accept their statement.
D.: Where do they exist?
M.: In you.
D.: Then it is only idea - that which I can create and control?
M.: Everything is like that.
D.: But I can create pure fictions e.g., hare’s horn or only part
truths, e.g. mirage, while there are also facts irrespective of my
imagination. Do the gods Iswara or Vishnu exist like that?
M.: Yes.
D.: Is He subject to pralaya (cosmic dissolution)?
M.: Why? Man becoming aware of the Self transcends cosmic
dissolution (pralaya) and becomes liberated (mukta). Why not
God (Iswara) who is infinitely wiser and abler?

D.: Do devas and pisachas (devils) exist similarly?
M.: Yes.
D.: How are we to conceive of Supreme Consciousness (Chaitanya
Brahman)?
M.: As that which is.
D.: Should it be thought of as Self-Effulgent?
M.: It transcends light and darkness. An individual (jiva) sees both.
The Self enlightens the individual to see light and darkness.
D.: Should it be realised as “I am not the body, nor the agent, nor the
enjoyer, etc.”?
M.: Why these thoughts? Do we now think that we are men, etc.? By
not thinking so, do we cease to be men?
D.: Should one realise it then by the scriptural text such as “There
are no differences here”.

  

M.: Why even that?
D.: If we think “I am the real,” will it do?
M.: All thoughts are inconsistent with realisation. The correct state is
to exclude thoughts of ourselves and all other thoughts. Thought
is one thing and realisation is quite another.
D.: Is it not necessary or at least advantageous to render the body
invisible in one’s spiritual progress?
M.: Why do you think of that? Are you the body?
D.: No. But advanced spirituality must effect a change in the body.
Is it not so?
M.: What change do you desire in the body, and why?
D.: Is not invisibility evidence of advanced Wisdom (jnana)?
M.: In that case, all those who spoke, who wrote and who passed their
lives in the sight of others must be considered ignorant (ajnanis)!
D.: But the sages Vasistha and Valmiki possessed such powers?
M.: It might have been their fate (prarabdha) to develop such powers
(siddhis) side by side with their wisdom (jnana). Why should you
aim at that which is not essential but apt to prove a hindrance to

wisdom (jnana)? Does the Sage (Jnani) feel oppressed by his body
being visible?
D.: No.
M.: A hypnotist can render himself suddenly invisible. Is he therefore
a Sage (Jnani)?
D.: No.
M.: Visibility and invisibility refer to a seer. Who is that seer? Solve
that first. Other matters are unimportant.
D.: The Vedas contain conflicting accounts of Cosmogony. Ether is
said to be the first creation in one place; vital energy (prana) in
another place; something else in yet another; water in still another,
and so on. How are these to be reconciled? Do not these impair the
credibility of the Vedas?
M.: Different seers saw different aspects of truths at different times,
each emphasising some one view. Why do you worry about their
conflicting statements? The essential aim of the Veda is to teach us the
nature of the imperishable Atman and show us that we are That.
D.: I am satisfied with that portion.
M.: Then treat all the rest as artha vada (auxiliary arguments) or
expositions for the sake of the ignorant who seek to trace the genesis
of things and matters.
D.: I am a sinner. I do not perform religious sacrifices (homas), etc.
Shall I have painful rebirths for that reason? Pray save me!
M.: Why do you say that you are a sinner? Your trust in God is sufficient
to save you from rebirths. Cast all burden on Him.
In the Tiruvachagam it is said: “Though I am worse than a dog, you
have graciously undertaken to protect me. This delusion of birth
and death is maintained by you. Moreover, am I the person to sift
and judge? Am I the Lord here? Oh Maheswara! It is for you to
roll me through bodies (by births and deaths) or to keep me fixed
at your own feet.” Therefore have faith and that will save you.
D.: Sir, I have faith - and still I encounter difficulties. Weakness and
giddiness afflict me after I practise concentration.
M.: Breath-control (pranayama) properly performed should increase
one’s strength.

D.: I have my professional work and yet I want to be in perpetual
dhyana. Will they conflict with each other?
M.: There will be no conflict. As you practise both and develop
your powers you will be able to attend to both. You will begin
to look on business as a dream. Says the Bhagavad Gita: “That
which is the night of all beings, for the disciplined man is the
time of waking; when other beings are waking, then is it night
for the sage who seeth.” (11.69.)
Talk 31.
A visitor asked: What to do to get liberation (moksha)?
M.: Learn what liberation is.
D.: Should I do worship (upasana) for it?
M.: Worship is for mind control (chitta nirodha) and concentration.
D.: Should I do idol worship? Is there any harm in it?
M.: So long as you think you are the body there is no harm.
D.: How to get over the cycle of births and deaths?
M.: Learn what it means.
D.: Should I not leave my wife and family?
M.: How do they harm you? First find out who you are.
D.: Should not one give up wife, wealth, home?
M.: Learn first what samsara is. Is all that samsara? Have there not
been men living among them and getting realisation?
D.: What are the steps of practical training (sadhana) for it?
M.: It depends on the qualifications and the nature of the seeker.
D.: I am doing idol worship.
M.: Go on with it. It leads to concentration of mind. Get one-pointed.
All will come out right. People think that freedom (moksha) is
somewhere yonder and should be sought out. They are wrong.
Freedom (moksha) is only knowing the Self within yourself.
Concentrate and you will get it. Your mind is the cycle of births
and deaths (samsara).
D.: My mind is very unsteady. What should I do?

M.: Fix your attention on any single thing and try to hold on to it.
All will be right.
D.: I find concentration difficult.
M.: Go on practising. Your concentration will be as easy as breathing.
That will be the crown of your achievements.
D.: Are not abstinence and pure food helpful?
M.: Yes, all that is good. (Then Maharshi concentrates and silently
gazes at vacancy, and thus sets an example to the questioner).
D.: Do I not require Yoga?
M.: What is it but the means to concentration?
D.: To help concentration, is it not good to have some aids?
M.: Breath-regulation, etc., are such helps.
D.: Is it not possible to get a vision of God?
M.: Yes. You see this and that. Why not see God? Only you must know
what God is. All are seeing God always. But they do not know it.
You find out what God is. People see, yet see not, because they
know not God.
D.: Should I not go on with repetition of sacred syllables, (mantra
japa), e.g., Krishna or Rama’s name, when I worship images?
M.: Mental japa is very good. That helps meditation. Mind gets
identified with the repetition and then you get to know what
worship (puja) really is - the losing of one’s individuality in that
which is worshipped.
D.: Is the Universal Soul (Paramatma) always different from us?
M.: That is the common belief, but it is wrong. Think of Him as not
different from you, and then you achieve identity of Self with God.
D.: Is it not the Advaita doctrine to become one with God?
M.: Where is becoming? The thinker is all the while the Real. He
ultimately realises the fact. Sometimes we forget our identities, as
in sleep and dreams. But God is perpetual consciousness.
D.: Is not the Master’s guidance necessary, besides idol worship?
M.: How did you start it without advice?
D.: From sacred books (puranas).

M.: Yes. Someone tells you of God, or Bhagavan Himself tells you.
In the latter case God Himself is your Master. What matters it who
the Master is? We really are one with Master or Bhagavan. The
Master is God; one discovers it in the end. There is no difference
between human-guru and God-guru.
D.: If we have done virtuous action (punya) the achievement will not
leave us. I hope.
M.: You will reap your destiny (prarabdha) that way.
D.: Will not a Wise Master be a great help in pointing out the way?
M.: Yes. If you go on working with the light available, you will meet
your Master, as he himself will be seeking you.
D.: Is there a difference between prapatti (self-surrender) and the
Path of Yoga of the Seers?
M.: Jnana Marga and Bhakti Marga (prapatti) are one and the same.
Self-surrender leads to realisation just as enquiry does. Complete
self-surrender means that you have no further thought of ‘I’. Then all
your predispositions (samskaras) are washed off and you are free. You
should not continue as a separate entity at the end of either course.
D.: Do not we go to Heaven (svarga), etc. as the result of our actions?
M.: That is as true as the present existence. But if we enquire
who we are and discover the Self, what need is there to think
of heaven, etc.?
D.: Should I not try to escape rebirth?
M.: Yes. Find out who is born and who has the trouble of existence now.
When you are asleep do you think of rebirths or even the present
existence, etc.? So find out whence the present problem arises and
there is the solution also. You will discover that there is no birth, no
present trouble or unhappiness, etc. All is That; All is Bliss; we are
freed from rebirth in fact. Why fret over the misery of rebirth?
Talk 32.
A visitor: The saints Sri Chaitanya and Sri Ramakrishna wept before
God and achieved success. Is that not the path to follow?
M.: Yes. There was a powerful force (sakti) drawing them on through
all those experiences. Trust in that huge power to take you on to

your goal. Tears are often considered a sign of weakness. These
great persons were certainly not weak. These manifestations are
only passing signs of the great current carrying them on. We must
look to the end achieved.
D.: Can this physical body be made to disappear into nothingness?
M.: Why this question? Can you not find out if you are the body?
D.: Can we have disappearance from sight (antardhana) like the yogis
Vasishta or Viswamitra?
M.: These are only physical matters. Is that the essential object of our
interest? Are you not the Self? Why trouble about other matters? Take
the essence; reject other learned theories as useless. They who think that
physical disappearance counts in freedom are mistaken. No such thing
is needed. You are not the body; what does it matter if it disappears
in one way or another? There is no great merit in such phenomena. In
what does superiority or inferiority consist? Achievement of the Real
alone matters. The loss of the ‘I’ is the main fact, and not the loss of the
body. Identity of the Self with the body is the real bondage. Leave off
the false notion and perceive intuitively the Real. That alone matters.
If you melt a gold ornament before testing it to be gold, what matters
it how it is melted, whole or in parts, or of what shape the ornament
was? All that you are interested in is if it is gold. The dead man sees
not his body. It is the survivor that thinks about the manner in which
the body is parted from. The realised have no death with or without
the body, the realised man is equally aware and sees no difference. To
him the one state is not superior to the other. To an outsider also the
fortunes of a liberated one’s body need not be of any concern; mind
your business. Realise the Self; after realisation there will be time to
think of what form of death is preferable to you.
It is the false identity of the Self with the body that causes the idea
of preference, etc. Are you the body? Were you aware of it when
you were fast asleep last night? No! What is it that exists now and
troubles you? It is ‘I’. Get rid of it and be happy.
Talk 33.
A visitor: “The Supreme Spirit (Brahman) is Real. The world (jagat)
is illusion,” is the stock phrase of Sri Sankaracharya. Yet others
say, “The world is reality”. Which is true?

M.: Both statements are true. They refer to different stages of
development and are spoken from different points of view. The
aspirant (abhyasi) starts with the definition, that which is real
exists always; then he eliminates the world as unreal because it is
changing. It cannot be real; ‘not this, not this!’ The seeker ultimately
reaches the Self and there finds unity as the prevailing note. Then,
that which was originally rejected as being unreal is found to be a
part of the unity. Being absorbed in the Reality, the world also is
Real. There is only being in Self-Realisation, and nothing but being.
Again Reality is used in a different sense and is applied loosely by
some thinkers to objects. They say that the reflected (adhyasika)
Reality admits of degrees which are named:
(1) Vyavaharika satya (everyday life) - this chair is seen by me
and is real.
(2) Pratibhasika satya (illusory) - Illusion of a serpent in a
coiled rope. The appearance is real to the man who thinks so.
This phenomenon appears at a point of time and under certain
circumstances.
(3) Paramartika satya (ultimate) - Reality is that which remains
the same always and without change.
If Reality be used in the wider sense the world may be said to
have the everyday life and illusory degrees (vyavaharika and
pratibhasika satya). Some, however, deny even the reality of
practical life - vyavaharika satya and consider it to be only
projection of the mind. According to them it is only pratibhasika
satya, i.e., an illusion.

YOGI RAMIAH’S ACCOUNT OF HIS EXPERIENCES
Talk 34.
Sitting in Maharshi’s presence brings peace of mind. I used to sit in
samadhi for three or four hours together. Then I felt my mind took a
form and came out from within. By constant practice and meditation
it entered the Heart and was merged into it. I conclude that the Heart
is the resting place of mind. The result is peace. When the mind is
absorbed in the Heart, the Self is realised. This could be felt even at
the stage of concentration (dharana).

I asked Maharshi about contemplation. He taught me as follows:-
When a man dies the funeral pyre is prepared and the body is laid flat
on the pyre. The pyre is lit. The skin is burnt, then the flesh and then
the bones until the whole body falls to ashes. What remains thereafter?
The mind. The question arises, ‘How many are there in this body
- one or two?’ If two, why do people say ‘I’ and not ‘we’? There is
therefore only one. Whence is it born? What is its nature (swaroopa)?
Enquiring thus the mind also disappears. Then what remains over is
seen to be ‘I’. The next question is ‘Who am I?’ The Self alone. This is
contemplation. It is how I did it. By this process attachment to the body
(dehavasana) is destroyed. The ego vanishes. Self alone shines. One
method of getting mind-dissolution (manolaya) is association with
great ones - the yoga adepts (Yoga arudhas). They are perfect adepts
in samadhi. Self-Realisation has been easy, natural, and perpetual to
them. Those moving with them closely and in sympathetic contact
gradually absorb the samadhi habit from them.
Talk 35.
An educated visitor asked Bhagavan about dvaita and advaita.
M.: Identification with the body is dvaita. Non-identification is
advaita.
Talk 36.
An aristocratic and distinguished lady visitor from the North
accompanied by her Private Secretary arrived at noon, waited a
few minutes and asked Maharshi soon after he returned to the hall
after lunch:
D.: Maharajji, can we see the dead?
M.: Yes.
D.: Can the yogis show them to us?
M.: Yes. They may. But do not ask me to show them to you. For I
cannot.
D.: Do you see them?
M.: Yes, in dreams.
D.: Can we realise the goal through yoga?

M.: Yes.
D.: Have you written on yoga? Are there books on the subject by
you?
M.: Yes.
After she left the Master observed: “Did we know our relatives before
their birth that we should know them after their death?”
Talk 37.
“What is Karma?” asked someone.
M.: That which has already begun to bear fruit is classified as
prarabdha Karma (past action). That which is in store and will
later bear fruit is classified as sanchita Karma (accumulated action).
This is multifarious like the grain obtained by villagers as barter
for cress (greens). Such bartered grain consists of rice, ragi, barley,
etc., some floating on, others sinking in water. Some of it may be
good, bad or indifferent. When the most potent of the multifarious
accumulated karma begins to bear fruit in the next birth it is called
the prarabdha of that birth.
Talk 38.
When one of the present attendants came the first time to Bhagavan,
he asked: “What is the way for liberation?” Maharshi replied: “The
way already taken leads to liberation.”

Talk 39.
22nd September, 1936
Conversing with R. Seshagiri Rao, a visitor, Maharshi remarked
that a Self-Realised sage (Atma Jnani) alone can be a good Karma
yogi. “After the sense of doership has gone let us see what happens. Sri
Sankara advised inaction. But did he not write commentaries and take
part in disputation? Do not trouble about doing action or otherwise.
Know Thyself. Then let us see whose action it is. Whose is it? Let action
complete itself. So long as there is the doer he must reap the fruits of
his action. If he does not think himself the doer there is no action for
him. He is an ascetic who has renounced worldly life (sanyasin).”

D.: How did the ego arise?
M.: It is not necessary to know it. Know the present. Not knowing
that, why do you worry about other times?
Maharshi said in reply to a question: “Is the world within you or
without you? Does it exist apart from you? Does the world come
and tell you ‘I exist’?”
Talk 40.
The Brahmin questioner resumed: “How do we know that action is
ours or not?”
M.: If the fruits of actions do not affect the person he is free from
action.
D.: Is intellectual knowledge enough?
M.: Unless intellectually known, how to practice it? Learn it
intellectually first, then do not stop with that. Practise it.
Maharshi then made certain remarks: “When you adhere to one
philosophical system (siddhanta) you are obliged to condemn
the others. That is the case with the heads of monasteries
(matadhipatis)”.
All people cannot be expected to do the same kind of action.
Each one acts according to his temperament and past lives.
Wisdom, Devotion, Action (jnana, bhakti, karma) are all
interlocked. Meditation on forms is according to one’s own mind.
It is meant for ridding oneself of other forms and confining oneself
to one form. It leads to the goal. It is impossible to fix the mind
in the Heart to start with. So these aids are necessary. Krishna
says that there is no birth (janma) to you, me, etc., and later says
he was born before Aditya, etc. Arjuna disputes it. Therefore it is
certain that each one thinks of God according to his own degree
of advancement.
You say you are the body in wakeful state; not the body in sleep.
Bodies being several-fold for an individual, should not there be
infinite capacities for God? Whichever method one follows, that
method is encouraged by the Sages. For it leads to the goal like
any other method.

Talk 41.
D.: Are there heaven (swarga) and hell (naraka)?
M.: There must be someone to go there. They are like dreams. We see time
and space exist in dream also. Which is true, dream or wakefulness?
D.: So we must rid ourselves of lust (kama), anger, (krodha), etc.
M.: Give up thoughts. You need not give up anything else. You must
be there to see anything. It is the Self. Self is ever-conscious.
D.: Are pilgrimages, etc., good?
M.: Yes.
D.: What effort is necessary for reaching the Self?
M.: ‘I’ should be destroyed. Self is not to be reached. Is there any
moment when Self is not? It is not new. Be as you are. What is new
cannot be permanent. What is real must always exist.
D.: What is sacrifice through wisdom (jnana yajna) or other sacrifices?
M.: Other disciplines exist for it. Practice is for gaining wisdom (jnana).
D.: Are jivanmuktas (living liberated souls) of different kinds?
M.: What does it matter if they differ externally? There is no difference
in their wisdom (jnana).
D.: When loyal to one Master can you respect others?
M.: Guru is only one. He is not physical. So long as there is weakness
the support of strength is needed.
D.: J. Krishnamurti says, “No Guru is necessary?”
M.: How did he know it? One can say so after realising but not before.
D.: You have gained this state by great effort. What shall we poor
souls do?
M.: We are in our Self. We are not in the world.
D.: Heaven and hell - what are they?
M.: You carry heaven and hell with you. Your lust, anger, etc., produce
these regions. They are like dreams.
D.: The Gita says that if a man fixes his attention between the
eyebrows and holds his breath he reaches the Supreme state. How
is that done?

M.: You are always in the Self and there is no reaching it. The eyebrow
is only a place where attention is to be fixed (seat of meditation
- upasanasthana).
D.: You have spoken of the Heart as the seat of meditation?
M.: Yes, it is also that.
D.: What is Heart?
M.: It is the centre of the Self. The Self is the centre of centres. The
Heart represents the psychic centre and not the physical centre.
D.: The term ‘jnana’ is realised Wisdom. The same term is used for
the method also. Why?
M.: ‘Jnana’ includes the method also because it ultimately results
in realisation.
D.: Is a man to engage in teaching his knowledge however imperfect?
M.: If his prarabdha be that way.
In the seventh chapter, Arjuna asks if Karma is a method
(sadhana). Krishna answers that it is so if done without the sense
of doership.
So also are Karmas approved by scriptures which deny Karma. The
Karma disapproved by them is that which is done with the sense of
doership. Do not leave Karma. You cannot do so. Give up the sense
of doership. Karma will go on automatically. Or Karma will drop
away from you. If Karma be your lot according to prarabdha, it will
surely be done whether you will it or not; if Karma be not your lot,
it will not be done even if you intently engage in it. Janaka, Suka,
etc., were also in work without ahankara, Karma may be done for
fame, or may be done unselfishly and for the public good. Yet even
then they want applause. So it is really selfish.
D.: What is that one thing, knowing which all doubts are solved?
M.: Know the doubter. If the doubter be held, the doubts will not
arise. Here the doubter is transcendent. Again when the doubter
ceases to exist, there will be no doubts arising. From where will
they arise? All are jnanis, jivanmuktas. Only they are not aware
of the fact. Doubts must be uprooted. This means that the doubter
must be uprooted. Here the doubter is the mind.

D.: What is the method?
M.: ‘Who am I?’ is the investigation.
D.: May we perform japa?
M.: Why should you think I am this? Investigate and the thoughts
cease. What is, namely the Self, will be revealed as the inescapable
residue.
D.: Is hatha yoga necessary?
M.: It is one of the aids - not that it is always necessary. It depends
upon the person. Vichara surpasses pranayama. In Yoga Vasishta
Chudala advises investigation (vichara) to Sikhidvaja for killing
the ego.
Reality can be reached by holding on to prana or intellect. Hatha
yoga is the former; Vichara is the latter.
D.: Is there any individuality for the Jnani after Realization?
M.: How can he retain individuality?
Even ordinarily the elders advise achamana and pranayama before
undertaking any work - be it worldly or other-worldly. That means,
concentration of mind accomplishes the work.
D.: I meditate neti-neti (not this - not this).
M.: No - that is not meditation. Find the source. You must reach the
source without fail. The false ‘I’ will disappear and the real ‘I’ will
be realised. The former cannot exist apart from the latter.

Talk 42.
24th September, 1936
Mr. Duncan Greenlees, Madanapalli, wrote as follows:- One has at
times had vivid flashes of a consciousness whose centre is outside
the normal self and which seems to be inclusive. Without concerning
the mind with philosophical concepts, how would Bhagavan advise
us to work towards getting, retaining and extending those flashes?
Does abhyasa in such experiences involve retirement?
Sri Bhagavan answered: ‘Outside’ - For whom is inside or outside?
They can be only so long as there are the subject and object. For

whom are these two again? They both will resolve into the subject
only. See who is in the subject. The investigation leads you to pure
consciousness beyond the subject.
Normal self is the mind. This mind is with limitations. But pure
consciousness is beyond limitations and reached by investigation as
above outlined.
Getting - Self is always there. One seeks to destroy the obstacles
to the revelation of the Self.
Retaining - Having once gained the Self it will be understood to
be Here and Now. It is never lost.
Extending - There is no extending the Self, for it is always without
contraction or expansion.
Retirement - Abiding in the Self is solitude. Because there is nothing
alien to the Self. Retirement must be from some one place to
another. There is neither the one nor the other apart from the Self.
All being the Self, retirement is impossible and inconsistent.
Abhyasa is investigation into the Self.

Talk 43.
28th March, 1935
Mr. S. Ranganathan, I.C.S., Collector of Vellore, Mr. S. V. Ramamurthi,
I.C.S. and Mr. T. Raghaviah, late Diwan of Pudukottah State, visited
the Asramam. Mr. Ranganathan asked, “Kindly instruct me as to how
the mind may be controlled.”
M.: There are two methods. The one is to see what the mind is; then
it subsides. The second is to fix your attention on something; then
the mind remains quiet.
The questioner repeated the question for further elucidation. The
same answer was returned with a little more added. The questioner
did not look satisfied.
Mr. Raghaviah: Men of the world that we are, we have some kind of
grief or another and do not know how to get over it. We pray to
God and still are not satisfied. What can we do?
M.: Trust God.

D.: We surrender; but still there is no help.
M.: Yes. If you have surrendered, you must be able to abide by the
will of God and not make a grievance of what may not please you.
Things may turn out differently from what they look apparently.
Distress often leads men to faith in God.
D.: But we are worldly. There is the wife, there are the children, friends
and relatives. We cannot ignore their existence and resign ourselves to
Divine Will, without retaining some little of the personality in us.
M.: That means you have not surrendered as professed by you. You
must only trust God.
Mr. Ramamurthi: Swamiji, I have read Brunton’s book A Search in
Secret India, and was much impressed by the last chapter, where
he says that it is possible to be conscious without thinking. I know
that one can think, remaining forgetful of the physical body. Can
one think without the mind? Is it possible to gain that consciousness
which is beyond thoughts?
M.: Yes. There is only one consciousness, which subsists in the waking,
dream and sleep states. In sleep there is no ‘I’. The ‘I-thought’ arises
on waking and then the world appears. Where was this ‘I’ in sleep?
Was it there or was it not? It must have been there also, but not in the
way that you feel now. The present is only the ‘I-thought’, whereas the
sleeping ‘I’ is the real ‘I’. It subsists all through. It is consciousness.
If it is known you will see that it is beyond thoughts.
D.: Can we think without the mind?
M.: Thoughts may be like any other activities, not disturbing to the
Supreme consciousness.
D.: Can one read others’ minds?
The Master as usual told him to find his Self before worrying
about others.
“Where are others apart from one’s own Self?” asked the Master.
Mr. Raghaviah: How shall we correlate the higher experience with
the lower experience (meaning spiritual experience with mundane
affairs)?
M.: There is only one experience. What are the worldly experiences
but those built up on the false ‘I’? Ask the most successful man of

the world if he knows his Self. He will say “No”. What can anyone
know without knowing the Self? All worldly knowledge is built
upon such a flimsy foundation.
Mr. Ramamurthi: How to know the ‘Real I’ as distinct from the ‘false I’.
M.: Is there anyone who is not aware of himself? Each one knows,
but yet does not know, the Self. A strange paradox.
The Master added later, “If the enquiry is made whether mind exists,
it will be found that mind does not exist. That is control of mind.
Otherwise, if the mind is taken to exist and one seeks to control it,
it amounts to mind controlling the mind, just like a thief turning
out to be a policeman to catch the thief, i.e., himself. Mind persists
in that way alone, but eludes itself.”

Talk 44.
3rd April, 1935
Mr. Ekanath Rao, an Engineer, asked Sri Bhagavan if solitude is
necessary for vichara.
M.: There is solitude everywhere. The individual is solitary always.
His business is to find it out within, and not seek it without.
D.: The work-a-day world is distracting.
M.: Do not allow yourself to be distracted. Enquire for whom there
is distraction. It will not afflict you after a little practice.
D.: Even the attempt is impossible.
M.: Make it and it will be found not so difficult.
D.: But the answer does not come for the search inward.
M.: The enquirer is the answer and no other answer can come. What
comes afresh cannot be true. What always is, is true.

Talk 45.
6th April, 1935
A visitor asked: The path of realisation is difficult. Worldly matters
are easy of understanding, whereas this is not.
M.: Yes. The mind always seeks external knowledge, leaving aside
its own inner knowledge.

D.: A stay of one day with Sri Bhagavan is good; a stay of two days is
better; of three days, more so, and so on. If it is a continuous stay
here, how shall we get on with our mundane work?
M.: Stay here or elsewhere must be understood to be the same and
to have the same effect.

Talk 46.
12th April, 1935
After hearing the Malayalam version of Upadesa Sara chanted,
Mr. Ramachandra Iyer of Nagercoil asked in a characteristically
unsophisticated way about the mind, concentration and control.
The Master said that the mind is only identity of the Self with the
body. It is a false ego that is created; it creates false phenomena in
its turn, and appears to move in them; all these are false. The Self
is the only Reality. If the false identity vanishes the persistence of
the Reality becomes apparent. It does not mean that Reality is not
here and now. It is always there and eternally the same. It is also in
everyone’s experience. For everyone knows that he is. “Who is he?”
Subjectively, “Who am I?” The false ego is associated with objects;
this ego itself is its own object. Objectivity is the falsity. Subject is
alone the Reality. Do not confound yourself with the object, namely
the body. This gives rise to the false ego, consequently of the world
and your movements therein with the resulting misery. Do not think
yourself to be this, that or anything; to be so and so, or to be such
and such. Only leave off the falsity. The Reality will reveal itself.
The scriptures say that the Self is nityasiddha, ever present, and yet
speak of the removal of ajnana. If Self is (nitya) always and (siddha)
present, how can there be ajnana? For whom is the ajnana? These
are contradictory. But such statements are for guiding the earnest
seeker in the right way. He does not readily understand the only Truth
if mentioned in plain words as in natwam naham neme janadhipah
(not thou, nor I, nor these kings ...). Sri Krishna declared the Truth,
but Arjuna could not grasp it. Later Krishna plainly says that people
confound Him with the body, whereas in reality He was not born nor
will He die. Still Arjuna requires the whole Gita for the Truth to be
made clear to him.

Look, the Self is only Be-ing, not being this or that. It is simple
Being. Be - and there is an end of the ignorance. Enquire for whom
is the ignorance. The ego arises when you wake up from sleep. In
deep sleep you do not say that you are sleeping and that you are
going to wake up or that you have been sleeping so long. But still
you are there. Only when you are awake you say that you have
slept. Your wakefulness comprises sleep also in it. Realise your
pure Be-ing. Let there be no confusion with the body. The body
is the result of thoughts. The thoughts will play as usual, but you
will not be affected. You were not concerned with the body when
asleep; so you can always remain.
Mr. Ekanatha Rao: How can anyone reconcile such activity with the
wage-earning which is a necessity for worldly people?
M.: Actions form no bondage. Bondage is only the false notion. “I
am the doer.” Leave off such thoughts and let the body and senses
play their role, unimpeded by your interference.

Talk 47.
20th April, 1935
A Malayalee visitor expressed his concern for the misery of the
world and his opinion that ‘Quest for Self’ looked selfish in the
midst of such suffering environments. His solution appeared to
be selfless work.
M.: The sea is not aware of its wave. Similarly the Self is not aware
of its ego.
Note: This makes clear what Sri Bhagavan means by quest for the
source of ego.
Talk 48.
A visitor asked Sri Bhagavan, “You are Bhagavan. So you would
know when I shall get jnana. Tell me when I shall be a Jnani.” Sri
Bhagavan replied, “If I am Bhagavan there is no one besides the
Self - therefore no Jnani or ajnani. If otherwise I am as good as
you are and know as much as yourself. Either way I cannot answer
your question.”

Talk 49.
24th April, 1935
Some men asked the Master questions which ultimately resolved
themselves into one, that ‘I’ is not perceptible however much they
might struggle.
The Master’s reply was in the usual strain: “Who is it that says that ‘I’ is
not perceptible? Is there an ‘I’ ignorant, and an ‘I’ elusive? Are there two
‘I’s in the same person? Ask yourself these questions. It is the mind which
says that ‘I’ is not perceptible. Where is that mind from? Know the mind.
You will find it a myth. King Janaka said, ‘I have discovered the thief
who had been ruining me so long. I will now deal with him summarily.
Then I shall be happy.’ Similarly it will be with others.”
D.: How to know the ‘I’?
M.: The ‘I-I’ is always there. There is no knowing it. It is not a new
knowledge acquired. What is new and not here and now will be
evanescent only. The ‘I’ is always there. There is obstruction to its
knowledge and it is called ignorance. Remove the ignorance and
knowledge shines forth. In fact this ignorance or even knowledge
is not for Atman. They are only overgrowths to be cleared off. That
is why Atman is said to be beyond knowledge and ignorance. It
remains as it naturally is - that is all.
D.: There is no perceptible progress in spite of our attempts.
M.: Progress can be spoken of in things to be obtained afresh. Whereas
here it is the removal of ignorance and not acquisition of knowledge.
What kind of progress can be expected in the quest for the Self?
D.: How to remove the ignorance?
M.: While lying in bed in Tiruvannamalai you dream in your sleep that
you find yourself in another town. The scene is real to you. Your
body remains here on your bed in a room. Can a town enter your
room, or could you have left this place and gone elsewhere, leaving
the body here? Both are impossible. Therefore your being here and
seeing another town are both unreal. They appear real to the mind.
The ‘I’ of the dream soon vanishes, then another ‘I’ speaks of the
dream. This ‘I’ was not in the dream. Both the ‘I’s are unreal. There

is the substratum of the mind which continues all along, giving rise
to so many scenes. An ‘I’ rises forth with every thought and with
its disappearance that ‘I’ disappears too. Many ‘I’s are born and die
every moment. The subsisting mind is the real trouble. That is the
thief according to Janaka. Find him out and you will be happy.
Talk 50.
Sri Bhagavan read out, from the Prabuddha Bharata, Kabir’s saying
that all know that the drop merges into the ocean but few know that
the ocean merges into the drop. This is para bhakti, said he.

Talk 51.
5th June, 1935
A young Brahmin (25 years of age) came on a visit to the Master. At
his sight he became hysterical and shouted Sivoham, Aham Brahma
Asmi, “You are God”, “You are Para Brahmam”. “You are my father”,
“Father, save me” and so on. His hysterics waxing, he beat his chest
violently alternately with both his hands, shouting Sivoham, Sivoham.
Then again he shouted hysterically gnashing his teeth, “I will stamp
out materialism”, as if he was crushing materialism between his teeth.
Then he asked. “Either give me power, either give me power - or - or
- or - I will...” He began as if to throttle himself.
When gently removed by others he fell prostrate before Sri Bhagavan,
saying, “I will take refuge at the feet of my Father. Father! You are
Parthasarathi, I am Arjuna. We will stamp out materialism,” and so on.
He was finally taken away from the presence of Maharshi. He washed
himself, took some light refreshment and quietly seated himself in the
hall for some hours. He abstained from the midday meal. In the afternoon
he had another fit when he shouted, “I will chop off the head of Krishna,
if he should come here now. He advised me to give up my job, but does
not protect my mother. Or let him chop off my head,” and so on.
After some hours of quiet, Sri Bhagavan asked Mr. K. L. Sarma to read
out a portion of his commentary on Anubandha (Appendix to 40 verses).
The gist of it is that people, unable to help themselves, ask for divine
powers to be utilised for human welfare. This is similar to the story of

a lame man who blustered, saying that he would overpower the enemy if
only he were helped on to his legs. The intention is good but there is no
sense of proportion. The young man on hearing it suddenly sprang to his
feet, saluting Sri Bhagavan and saying “Father! Father! I was mistaken.
Pardon me. Teach me. I shall abide by what you say,” and so on. Then
again in the evening he prostrated himself, saying, “I surrender.”

Talk 52.
9th June, 1935
A man from Cocanada asked: “My mind remains clear for two or
three days and turns dull for the next two or three days; and so it
alternates. What is it due to?”
M.: It is quite natural; it is the play of brightness (satva), activity (rajas)
and darkness (tamas) alternating. Do not regret the tamas; but when
satva comes into play, hold on to it fast and make the best of it.
D.: What is the Heart?
M.: It is the seat (if such could be said of it) of the Self.
D.: Is it the physical heart?
M.: No. It is the seat wherefrom ‘I-I’ arises.
D.: What becomes of the jiva after death?
M.: The question is not appropriate for a jiva now living. A
disembodied jiva may ask me, if convenient. In the meantime let
the embodied jiva solve its present problem and find who he is.
There will be an end of such doubts.
D.: What is dhyana?
M.: The word dhyana usually signifies meditation on some object,
whereas nididhyasana is used for enquiry into the Self. The triads
persist until the Self is realised. Dhyana and nididhyasana are the
same so far as the aspirant is concerned, because they involve trinity
and are synonymous with bhakti.
D.: How should dhyana be practised?
M.: Dhyana serves to concentrate the mind. The predominant idea
keeps off all others. Dhyana varies according to the individual. It
may be on an aspect of God, on a mantra, or on the Self, etc.

Talk 53.
15th June, 1935
A young man, Mr. Knowles, came for darsan. He had read Paul
Brunton’s two books. He asked: “The Buddhists say that ‘I’ is unreal,
whereas Paul Brunton in the Secret Path tells us to get over the ‘I-thought’
and reach the state of ‘I’. Which is true?”
M.: There are supposed to be two ‘I’s; the one is lower and unreal, of
which all are aware; and the other, the higher and the real, which
is to be realised.
You are not aware of yourself while asleep, you are aware in
wakefulness; waking, you say that you were asleep; you did not
know it in the deep sleep state. So then, the idea of diversity has
arisen along with the body-consciousness; this body-consciousness
arose at some particular moment; it has origin and end. What
originates must be something. What is that something? It is the
‘I’-consciousness. Who am I? Whence am I? On finding the source,
you realise the state of Absolute Consciousness.
D.: Who is this ‘I’? It seems to be only a continuum of sense-impression.
The Buddhist idea seems to be so too.
M.: The world is not external. The impressions cannot have an outer
origin. Because the world can be cognised only by consciousness.
The world does not say that it exists. It is your impression. Even so
this impression is not consistent and not unbroken. In deep sleep
the world is not cognised; and so it exists not for a sleeping man.
Therefore the world is the sequence of the ego. Find out the ego.
The finding of its source is the final goal.
D.: I believe that we should not inflict suffering on other lives. Should
we then endure the mosquito bite and submit to it also?
M.: You do not like to suffer yourself. How can you inflict suffering on
others? Just keep off mosquitoes since you suffer by their stings.
D.: Is it right that we kill other lives, e.g., mosquitoes, bugs?
M.: Everyone is a suicide. The eternal, blissful, and natural state has been
smothered by this life of ignorance. In this way the present life is due to
the killing of the eternal, pristine Being. Is it not a case of suicide? So
then, everyone is a suicide. Why worry about murders and killing?

In the course of a later talk the visitor said: “The world sends
impressions and I awake!”
M.: Can the world exist without someone to perceive it? Which is
prior? The Being-consciousness or the rising-consciousness? The
Being-consciousness is always there, eternal and pure. The rising-consciousness
rises forth and disappears. It is transient.
D.: Does not the world exist for others even when I am asleep?
M.: Such a world mocks at you also for knowing it without knowing
yourself. The world is the result of your mind. Know your mind.
Then see the world. You will realise that it is not different from
the Self.
D.: Is not Maharshi aware of himself and his surroundings, as clearly
as I am?
M.: To whom is the doubt? The doubts are not for the realised. They
are only for the ignorant.

Talk 54.
16th June, 1935
An Andhra Pandit - an elderly gentleman - had some doubts regarding
Kavyakantha’s exposition of Advaita. He has found it in books that
Brahman is free from sajatiya, vijatiya and swagata bheda. Such
conditions are satisfied in vivarta vada but not in parinama vada. In
the latter, swagata bheda is bound to be. The Master pointed out that
Dakshinamurti did not teach anything of the kind. He did not say that
Brahman is related to Sakti or not related. All that was, was only silence;
and the doubts of the sishyas (disciples) were cleared. The significance
is that there is nothing to be learnt, discussed and concluded. Everyone
knows ‘I am.’ There is the confusion that the ‘I’ is the body. Because
the ‘I’ arises from the Absolute and gives rise to buddhi (Intellect). In
buddhi the ‘I’ looks the size and shape of the body, na medhaya means
that Brahman cannot be apprehended by buddhi.
Brahman → aham (‘I-I’) → buddhi (intellect).
How can such buddhi crossing over aham discover Brahman? It is
impossible. Just get over the false conception of the ‘I’ being the

body. Discover to whom the thoughts arise. If the present ‘I’-ness
vanishes, the discovery is complete. What remains over is the pure
Self. Compare deep sleep and wakefulness. Diversity and body are
found only in the latter. In the former the Self remains without the
perception of body or of the world. Happiness reigns there.
The Sruti vakya, ‘Aham Brahmasmi’, relates to the state and not the
mode of mind. One cannot become Brahman by continuing to repeat
the mantra. It means that Brahman is not elsewhere. It is your Self.
Find that Self; Brahman is found. Do not attempt to reach Brahman
as if it were in some far off place.
The Pandit remarked that thoughts are so persistent that the aham
cannot be reached.
The Master said: The Brahma akara vritti helps to turn the mind
away from other thoughts. Either some such practice is necessary
or association with sadhus should be made. The sadhu has already
overcome the mind and remains in Peace. His proximity helps to
bring about such condition in others. Otherwise there is no meaning
in seeking a sadhu’s company.
Deho aham (I am the body) is limitation and is the root of all mean
and selfish actions and desires.
Brahma aham (I am Brahman) is passing beyond limitation and
signifies sympathy, charity, love etc., which are divine and virtuous.
D.: How does a grihasta (householder) fare in the scheme of moksha
(liberation)?
M.: Why do you think you are a grihasta? If you go out as a sanyasi,
a similar thought (that you are a sanyasi) will haunt you. Whether
you continue in the household, or renounce it and go to the forest,
your mind haunts you. The ego is the source of thoughts. It creates
the body and the world and makes you think you are a grihasta. If
you renounce the world, it will only substitute the thought sanyasi
for grihasta and the environments of the forest for those of the
household. But the mental obstacles are always there. They even
increase in new surroundings. There is no help in the change of
environment. The obstacle is the mind. It must be got over whether
at home or in the forest. If you can do it in the forest, why not in

the home? Therefore why change the environment? Your efforts
can be made even now, in whatever environment you may be.
The environment never abandons you, according to your desire.
Look at me. I left home. Look at yourselves. You have come
here leaving the home environment. What do you find here?
Is this different from what you left? Even if one is immersed
in nirvikalpa samadhi for years together, when he emerges from
it he will find himself in the environment which he is bound to
have. That is the reason for the Acharya emphasising sahaja
samadhi in preference to nirvikalpa samadhi in his excellent
work Viveka Chudamani.
One should be in spontaneous samadhi - that is, in one’s pristine
state - in the midst of every environment.
Later on Sri Bhagavan said: “Control of breath may be internal or
external.”
The antah pranayama (the internal breath-regulation) is as follows:-
Naham chinta (I-am-not-the-body idea) is rechaka (exhalation).
Koham (who am I?) is puraka (inhalation).
Soham (I am He) is kumbhaka (retention of breath).
Doing thus, the breath becomes automatically controlled.
Bahih pranayama (external control) is for one not endowed with
strength to control the mind. There is no way so sure as that; or a
sadhu’s company. The external practice must be resorted to by a
wise man if he does not enjoy a sadhu’s company. If in a sadhu’s
company the sadhu provides the needed strength, though unseen
by others, Pranayama need not be exactly as described in hatha
Yoga. If engaged in japa, dhyana, bhakti, etc., just a little control
of breath will suffice to control the mind. The mind is the rider and
the breath the horse. Pranayama is a check on the horse. By that
check the rider is checked.
Pranayama may be done just a little. To watch the breath is one way
of doing it. The mind abstracted from other activities is engaged
in watching the breath. That controls the breath; and in its turn the
mind is controlled.

If unable to do so, rechaka and puraka need not be practised.
Breath may be retained a short while in japa, dhyana, etc. Then,
too, good results will follow.

Talk 55.
18th June, 1935
D.: Can advaita be realised by japa of holy names; say Rama,
Krishna, etc.?
M.: Yes.
D.: Is it not a means of an inferior order?
M.: Have you been told to make japa or to discuss its order in the
scheme of things?
Silence.

Talk 56.
22nd June, 1935
A youth of twenty asked how to realise the Self. He sat down in
silence and waited more than an hour and then was about to leave.
While doing so, he asked:
D.: How to realise Self?
M.: Whose Self? Find out.
D.: Who am I?
M.: Find it yourself.
D.: I do not know.
M.: Think. Who is it that says “I do not know”? What is not known?
In that statement, who is the ‘I’?
D.: Somebody in me.
M.: Who is the somebody? In whom?
D.: Maybe some power.
M.: Find it.
D.: How to realise Brahman?
M.: Without knowing the Self why do you seek to know Brahman?

D.: The sastras say Brahman pervades all and me too.
M.: Find the ‘I’ in me and then there will be time to think of Brahman.
D.: Why was I born?
M.: Who was born? The answer is the same for all of your questions.
D.: Who am I then?
M.: (Smiling) Have you come to examine me and ask me? You must
say who you are.
D.: In deep sleep the soul leaves the body and remains elsewhere.
When it re-enters I awake. Is it so?
M.: What is it that leaves the body?
D.: The power, perhaps.
M.: Find out the power.
D.: The body is composed of five elements. What are the elements?
M.: Without knowing the Self how do you aim at knowing the elements?
The young man sat awhile and left with permission. The Master
remarked later: “All right. It will work.”

Talk 57.
23rd June, 1935
Sri Bhagavan said that sushumna is the name mostly mentioned in
scriptures. Other names also occur; e.g., para, atma, amrita. It is also
stated that sushumna becomes leena (merged in para). So it may be
said that para is the terminology of jnana, whereas sushumna is that
of Yoga.

24th June, 1935
A DOUBT IN ‘SRI RAMANA GITA’ ANSWERED
Chapter XIV, Stanza 10 reads: “With yet further progress, invisibility
also may result. Such an one, being pure consciousness only, flourishes
as a siddha.”
Chapter XVIII, Last Stanza reads: “The glory of the siddhis is past
imagination, they are equal to Siva, yea Siva himself, in being able
to grant boons.”

The meaning is that, with Self-Realization, real and incessant tapas
results. With the maturing of such tapas some jnanis can make their
bodies intangible and invisible. They are known as siddhas.
Later, “the greatness of the siddhas is incomprehensible. They are
equal to Siva and can even grant boons.” So said Sri Bhagavan.
There is an Upanishad mantra, atmajnam hyarchayet bhutikamah
(one desirous of liberation or wealth must serve a Self-realised
Sage). Here is no mention of siddha for granting boons. The Jnani
can do so. The mantras again, swe mahimni pratishtitah (abiding
in his own grandeur), anantam Brahma (Brahman is infinite), will
seem confounding when read with the slokas cited above. Sarvam
Khalvidam Brahma (All this is Brahman); Brahmavid Brahmaiva
Bhavati (the knower of Brahman becomes Brahman Itself), show that
a Jnani is sarvajna (all-knower). What then is the distinction between
the Jnani and the siddha, and the ability of the latter to grant boons,
implying the absence of it in the former?
This was the doubt. The master explained: “The Gita questions were
asked in a certain spirit. The answers were according to it. People look
to the body only and they want siddhis also. With Self-Realisation
no powers can extend even into it, and how can they extend beyond?
People anxious for siddhis are not content with their idea of jnana
and so want siddhis associated with it. They are likely to neglect the
supreme happiness of jnana and aspire for siddhis. For this they are
going through the by-lanes instead of the royal path and so will likely
lose their way. In order to guide them aright and keep them on the
royal road alone the siddhis are said to accompany jnana. In fact jnana
comprises all, and a Jnani will not waste even a thought on them. Let
the people get jnana and then seek siddhis if they so desire.
I have said: sarira samsrayah siddhayah (the siddhis relate to the
body), because their outlook is concerning the body. A Jnani and
siddha are not different. In varan datum (to bestow boons) the boons
include atmalabha (the gain of Self) also. The siddhis are not merely
of an inferior order but of the highest order.
The sastras are meant to suit varying conditions. Their spirit remains
the same. In Halasya Mahima there is a chapter on the eightfold

siddhissiddhis. There Siva says that His bhakta never wastes a thought
on them. Again Siva says that He never grants boons. The desires of
the devotees are fulfilled according to their prarabdha only. When
Iswara Himself says so, what of others? In order to display siddhis
there must be others to recognise them. That means there is no jnana
in the one who displays them. Therefore siddhis are not worthy of
any thought. Jnana alone is to be aimed at and gained.
Sri Ramana Gita Chapter XVII, Verse 4, Translation in Tamil is
inaccurate.
Sri Bhagavan pointed out the inaccuracy and corrected it.
Vaidharbha’s question was: “In practice, the thoughts are found
to manifest and subside alternately. Is this jnana?” Sri Bhagavan
explained the doubt as follows:
Some people think that there are different stages in jnana. The Self is
nitya aparoksha, i.e., ever-realised, knowingly or unknowingly. Sravana,
they argue, should therefore be aparoksha jnana (directly experienced)
and not paroksha jnana (indirect knowledge). But jnana should result
in duhkha nivriti (loss of misery) whereas sravana alone does not bring
it about. Therefore they say, though aparoksha, it is not unshaken; the
rising of vasanas is the cause of its being weak (not unchanging); when
the vasanas are removed, jnana becomes unshaken and bears fruit.
Others say sravana is only paroksha jnana. By manana (reflection) it
becomes aparoksha spasmodically. The obstruction to its continuity is
the vasanas: they rise up with reinforced vigour after manana. They
must be held in check. Such vigilance consists in remembering = “I
am not the body” and adhering to the aparoksha anubhava (direct
experience) which has been had in course of manana (reflection).
Such practice is called nididhyasana and eradicates the vasanas. Then
dawns the sahaja state. That is jnana, sure.
The aparoksha in manana cannot effect dukha nivritti (loss of misery)
and cannot amount to moksha, i.e., release from bondage because
the vasanas periodically overpower the jnana. Hence it is adridha
(weak) and becomes firm after the vasanas have been eradicated by
nididhyasana (one-pointedness).

SRI RAMANA GITA AGAIN
Mr. T. K. S. Iyer, a devotee, was speaking of the chakras Sri Bhagavan
said: Atman (the Self) alone is to be realised. Its realisation holds all
else in its compass. Sakti, Ganapati; siddhis, etc., are included in it.
Those who speak of these have not realised the Atman. Atman is in
the heart and is the Heart itself. The manifestation is in the brain. The
passage from the heart to the brain might be considered to be through
sushumna or a nerve with any other name. The Upanishads say pare
leena - meaning that sushumna or such nadis are all comprised in para,
i.e., the atma nadi. The yogis say that the current rising up to sahasrara
(brain) ends there. That experience is not complete. For jnana, they must
come to the Heart. Hridaya (Heart) is the alpha and omega.

Talk 58.
4th July, 1935
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Mr. Ranganathan, I. C. S: In Srimad Bhagavad Gita there is a passage:
One’s own dharma is the best; an alien dharma is full of risks.
What is the significance of one’s own dharma?
M.: It is usually interpreted to mean the duties of the orders and of
the different castes. The physical environment must also be taken
into consideration.
D.: If varnasrama dharma be meant, such dharma prevails only
in India. On the other hand the Gita should be universally
applicable.
M.: There is varnasrama in some form or other in every land. The
significance is that one should hold on to the single Atman and not
swerve therefrom. That is the whole gist of it.
sva = one’s own, i.e., of the Self, of the Atman.
para = the other’s, i.e., of the non-self, of the anatma.
Atma Dharma is inherence in the Self. There will be no distraction
and no fear. Troubles arise only when there is a second to oneself.
If the Atman be realised to be only unitary, there is no second and
therefore no cause for fear. The man, as he is now, confounds the

anatma (non-Self) dharma with atma (the Self) dharma and suffers.
Let him know the Self and abide in it; there is an end of fear, and
there are no doubts.
Even if interpreted as varnasrama dharma the significance is only
this much. Such dharma bears fruit only when done selflessly. That
is, one must realise that he is not the doer, but that he is only a tool
of some Higher Power. Let the Higher Power do what is inevitable
and let me act only according to its dictates. The actions are not
mine. Therefore the result of the actions cannot be mine. If one
thinks and acts so, where is the trouble? Be it varnasrama dharma
or loukika dharma (worldly activities), it is immaterial. Finally, it
amounts to this:
sva = atmanah (of the Self)
para = anaatmanah (of the non-self)
Such doubts are natural. The orthodox interpretation cannot be
reconciled with the life of a modern man obliged to work for his
livelihood in different capacities.
A man from Pondy interposed: Sarva dharmaan parityajya maamekam
saranam vraja (leaving all duties surrender to me only).
Sri Bhagavan: (All) Sarva is only anaatmanah (of the non-self);
the emphasis is on ekam (only). To the man who has strong hold
of the eka (one) where are the dharmas? It means, “Be sunk in
the Self.”
D.: The Gita was taught for action.
M.: What does the Gita say? Arjuna refused to fight.
Krishna said, “So long as you refuse to fight, you have the sense of
doership. Who are you to refrain or to act? Give up the notion of
doership. Until that sense disappears you are bound to act. You are
being manipulated by a Higher Power. You are admitting it by your
own refusal to submit to it. Instead recognise the Power and submit as
a tool. (Or to put it differently), if you refuse you will be forcibly drawn
into it. Instead of being an unwilling worker, be a willing one.
“Rather, be fixed in the Self and act according to nature without
the thought of doership. Then the results of action will not affect
you. That is manliness and heroism.”

Thus, ‘inherence in the Self’ is the sum and substance of Gita
teaching. Finally, the Master Himself added, “If a man be
established in the Self these doubts would not arise. They arise
only until he is established there.”
D.: Then of what use is such reply to the enquirer?
M.: The words still have force and will surely operate in due course.
Talk 59.
A moulvi asked: How does sleep overtake one?
M.: If the enquirer knows who is awake in the wakeful condition he
will also know how sleep comes on. The enquiry arises only to the
waking man and not to the sleeper. It must be easier to know the
waking Self than the sleeping Self.
D.: I know how I awoke. But I do not know how sleep comes on. I
am aware of my wakeful state. For instance if anyone takes away
my stick I prevent his doing so, whereas I cannot do so in sleep
or in dream. The proof of wakefulness is evident. But what is the
proof of sleep?
M.: Your ignorance is the evidence of sleep: your awareness is that
of wakefulness.
D.: My wakefulness is known by the opening of my eye. But how
does sleep overtake me?
M.: In the same way as sleep overtakes you, wakefulness also
overtakes you.
D.: But I do not perceive how sleep comes on in the same way as I
know my wakefulness.
M.: Never mind.
D.: Please describe what is sleep, without illustrations. Sleep by itself
should be known. I want a real picture of sleep.
M.: Such picture is sleep itself.
D.: Is it better to reach salvation, being married, or being a hermit?
M.: Whatever you think better.
D.: Visvamitra had no fall when in the married state, whereas he had
a fall in his hermit life. Does it not apply to others also?

M.: Visvamitra was as pure in the hermit life as when he was married.
There was no difference. He was as contaminated when married
as when he was a hermit.
D.: Was he a rishi?
M.: When contaminated he was not a rishi.
D.: Can he become a rishi even afterwards?
M.: Yes. By proper bhakti he could become a good rishi. Repentance
and prayer will set him right.
D.: With all your penance for so many years what have you got?
M.: I have got what need be got. I see what need be seen.
D.: Can all see the same?
M.: I see only just what all do. It is immanent in all.
D.: Is this the way for seeing It?
M.: Method may be anything. From whatever directions the pilgrims
may foregather, they must enter the Kaaba only by one route
(passage) or all gather only to enter the Kaaba.
D.: Please tell me two upadesas on the way to salvation as known
by you.
M.: What upadesa do I know? Everything is upadesa. Worship of
God is the only upadesa.

Talk 60.
5th July, 1935
ON MOUNA (SILENCE)
Sri Bhagavan: The silence of solitude is forced. Restrained speech
in society amounts to silence. For the man then controls his speech.
The speaker must come forth before he speaks. If engaged otherwise
speech is restrained. Introverted mind is otherwise active and is not
anxious to speak.
Mouna as a disciplinary measure is meant for limiting the mental
activities due to speech. If the mind is otherwise controlled
disciplinary mouna is unnecessary. For mouna becomes natural.
Vidyaranya has said that twelve years’ forced mouna brings about

absolute mouna - that is, makes one unable to speak. It is more like
a mute animal than otherwise. That is not mouna.
Mouna is constant speech. Inactivity is constant activity.

Talk 61.
6th July, 1935
Mr. Ekanatha Rao: How is dhyana practised - with eyes open or
closed?
M.: It may be done either way. The point is that the mind must be
introverted and kept active in its pursuit. Sometimes it happens
that when the eyes are closed the latent thoughts rush forth
with great vigour. It may also be difficult to introvert the mind
with the eyes open. It requires strength of mind to do so. The
mind is contaminated when it takes in objects. Otherwise, it
is pure. The main factor in dhyana is to keep the mind active in
its own pursuit without taking in external impressions or thinking
of other matters.
Talk 62.
Mr. Ekanatha Rao: What is sphurana (a kind of indescribable but
palpable sensation in the heart centre)?
M.: Sphurana is felt on several occasions, such as in fear, excitement,
etc. Although it is always and all over, yet it is felt at a particular
centre and on particular occasions. It is also associated with
antecedent causes and confounded with the body. Whereas, it is all
alone and pure; it is the Self. If the mind be fixed on the sphurana
and one senses it continuously and automatically it is realisation.
Again sphurana is the foretaste of Realisation. It is pure. The subject
and object proceed from it. If the man mistakes himself for the
subject, objects must necessarily appear different from him. They
are periodically withdrawn and projected, creating the world and the
subject’s enjoyment of the same. If, on the other hand, the man feels
himself to be the screen on which the subject and object are projected
there can be no confusion, and he can remain watching their appearance
and disappearance without any perturbation to the Self.

Talk 63.
A high officer asked: If juniors are promoted over oneself the mind
is perturbed. Will the enquiry, ‘Who am I?’ help the man to soothe
the mind under such circumstances?
M.: Yes. Quite so. The enquiry ‘Who am I?’ turns the mind inward
and makes it calm.
D.: I have faith in murti dhyana (worship of form). Will it not help
me to gain jnana?
M.: Surely it will. Upasana helps concentration of mind. Then the
mind is free from other thoughts and is full of the meditated form.
The mind becomes it - and thus quite pure. Then think who is the
worshipper. The answer is ‘I’, i.e., the Self. So the Self is gained
ultimately.
The present difficulty is that the man thinks that he is the doer. But
it is a mistake. It is the Higher Power which does everything and
the man is only a tool. If he accepts that position he is free from
troubles; otherwise he courts them. Take for instance, the figure
in a gopuram (temple tower), where it is made to appear to bear
the burden of the tower on its shoulders. Its posture and look are a
picture of great strain while bearing the very heavy burden of the
tower. But think. The tower is built on the earth and it rests on its
foundations. The figure (like Atlas bearing the earth) is a part of the
tower, but is made to look as if it bore the tower. Is it not funny?
So is the man who takes on himself the sense of doing.
Then the Malayalam version of Ulladu Narpadu was read out by
a devotee for the benefit of the visitor.
After hearing it, he asked: What about the reference to duality in
practice and unity at the end?
M.: Some people think that one must begin practice with dualistic idea.
It refers to them. They say that there is God; the man must worship
and meditate; ultimately the jiva merges into God. Others say that
the Supreme Being and the jiva are always apart and never merge
into each other. Howsoever it may be at the end, let us not trouble
ourselves about it now. All are agreed that the jiva IS. Let the man
find out the jiva, i.e., his Self. Then there will be time to find out if

the Self should merge in the Supreme, is a part thereof, or remains
different from it. Let us not forestall the conclusion. Keep an open
mind, dive within and find out the Self. The truth will itself dawn
upon you. Why should you determine beforehand if the finality
is unity absolute or qualified, or duality? There is no meaning in
it. The ascertainment is now made by logic and by intellect. The
intellect derives light from the Self (the Higher Power). How can
the reflected and partial light of the intellect envisage the whole
and the original Light? The intellect cannot reach the Self and how
can it ascertain its nature?
Such is the significance of the reference.
D.: One of the stanzas says that the scriptures so scrupulously studied
in the earlier stages are ultimately of no use. At what stage do they
become useless?
M.: When their essence is realised. The scriptures are useful to indicate the
existence of the Higher Power (the Self) and the way to gain it. Their
essence is that much only. When that is assimilated the rest is useless.
But they are voluminous, adapted to the development of the seeker. As
one rising up in the scale finds the regions one has passed to be only steps
to the higher stage, and so on, the steps ascended become purvapaksha
successively until the goal is gained. When the goal is reached it
remains alone, and all the rest becomes useless. That is how the
sastras become useless. We read so much. Do we remember all that
we read? But have we forgotten the essentials? The essential soaks
in the mind and the rest is forgotten. So it is with the sastras.
The fact is that the man considers himself limited and there arises
the trouble. The idea is wrong. He can see it for himself. In sleep
there was no world, no ego (no limited self), and no trouble.
Something wakes up from that happy state and says ‘I’. To that
ego the world appears. Being a speck in the world he wants more
and gets into trouble.
How happy he was before the rising of the ego! Only the rise of the
ego is the cause of the present trouble. Let him trace the ego to its
source and he will reach that undifferentiated happy state which is
sleepless sleep. The Self remains ever the same, here and now. There
is nothing more to be gained. Because the limitations have wrongly

been assumed there is the need to transcend them. It is like the ten
ignorant fools who forded a stream and on reaching the other shore
counted themselves to be nine only. They grew anxious and grieved
over the loss of the unknown tenth man. A wayfarer, on ascertaining
the cause of their grief, counted them all and found them to be ten.
But each one of them had counted the others leaving himself out.
The wayfarer gave each in succession a blow telling them to count
the blows. They counted ten and were satisfied. The moral is that the
tenth man was not got anew. He was all along there, but ignorance
caused grief to all of them.
Again, a woman wore a necklace round her neck but forgot it. She
began to search for it and made enquiries. A friend of hers, finding
out what she was looking for, pointed out the necklace round the
seeker’s neck. She felt it with her hands and was happy. Did she
get the necklace anew? Here again ignorance caused grief and
knowledge happiness.
Similarly also with the man and the Self. There is nothing to be
gained anew. Ignorance of the Self is the cause of the present
misery; knowledge of the Self brings about happiness.
Moreover, if anything is to be got anew it implies its previous
absence. What remained once absent might vanish again. So there
would be no permanency in salvation. Salvation is permanent
because the Self is here and now and eternal.
Thus the man’s efforts are directed towards the removal of ignorance.
Wisdom seems to dawn, though it is natural and ever present.
The visitor, while taking leave, saluted the master, and said, “It is
said that the victim in the tiger’s mouth is gone for ever.”
The reference is to a passage in Who am I? where it is stated that a
disciple can never revert to the world after he has once fallen into
the field of the Guru’s gracious look as surely as the prey in the
tiger’s jaws cannot escape.
Talk 64.
News of someone’s death was brought to Sri Bhagavan. He said,
“Good. The dead are indeed happy. They have got rid of the
troublesome overgrowth - the body. The dead man does not grieve.

The survivors grieve for the man who is dead. Do men fear sleep?
On the contrary sleep is courted and on waking up every man says
that he slept happily. One prepares the bed for sound sleep. Sleep is
temporary death. Death is longer sleep. If the man dies while yet alive
he need not grieve over others’ death. One’s existence is evident with
or without the body, as in waking, dream and sleep. Then why should
one desire continuance of the bodily shackles? Let the man find out
his undying Self and die and be immortal and happy.”

Talk 65.
13th July, 1935
A visitor: Is the jagat (world) perceived even after Self-Realization?
M.: From whom is this question? Is it from a Jnani or from an ajnani?
D.: From an ajnani.
M.: Realise to whom the question arises. It can be answered if it arises
after knowing the doubter. Can the jagat or the body say that it is?
Or does the seer say that the jagat or the body is? The seer must be
there to see the objects. Find out the seer first. Why worry yourself
now with what will be in the hereafter?
Sri Bhagavan continued: What does it matter if the jagat is
perceived or not perceived? Have you lost anything by your
perception of jagat now? Or do you gain anything where there is
no such perception in your deep sleep? It is immaterial whether
the world is perceived or not perceived.
The ajnani sees the Jnani active and is confounded. The jagat is
perceived by both; but their outlooks differ. Take the instance of the
cinema. There are pictures moving on the screen. Go and hold them.
What do you hold? It is only the screen. Let the pictures disappear.
What remains over? The screen again. So also here. Even when
the world appears, see to whom it appears. Hold the substratum
of the ‘I’. After the substratum is held what does it matter if the
world appears or disappears?
The ajnani takes the world to be real; whereas the Jnani sees it
only as the manifestation of the Self. It is immaterial if the Self
manifests itself or ceases to do so.

Talk 66.
15th July, 1935
A letter was received containing some learned questions pertaining
to memory, sleep and death. It looked, at first sight, that they were
cogent yet baffling to answer. But when the Master was approached on
the subject he disentangled the skein very nicely, pointing out that all
such confusion was due to the non-differentiation of the real ‘I’ from
the false ‘I’. The attributes and modes pertain to the latter and not to
the former. One’s efforts are directed only to remove one’s ignorance.
Afterwards they cease, and the real Self is found to be always there.
No effort is needed to remain as the Self.

Talk 67.
21st July, 1935
A visitor, Mr. K. S. N. Iyer of the South Indian Railway, said, “There
is a trifling halting-place in my meditation. When I ask myself, ‘Who
am I?’ my reasoning proceeds as follows; I see my hand. Who sees it?
My eye. How to see the eye? In a mirror. Similarly to see me, there
must be a mirror. ‘Which is to supply the place of the mirror in me?’
is my question.”
M.: Then why do you enquire, “Who am I?” Why do you say you are
troubled and so on? You could as well remain quiet. Why do you
rise out of your composure?
D.: Enquiring thus helps me to concentrate. Is concentration the only
benefit?
M.: What more do you want? Concentration is the thing. What makes
you come out of your quiet?
D.: Because I am drawn out.
M.: Enquiry of “Who am I?” means finding the source of ‘I’. When
that is found, that which you seek is accomplished.
(The gist of Sri Bhagavan’s words seems to be that one should
make a concerted effort and not give it up baffled, with a defeatist
mentality.)

Talk 68.
Dr. Radhakamal Mukerjee, a well-known Professor, fair man of
middle age, with a peaceful look, practising yoga or meditation, has
had some occult experiences and desires the mystery to be unravelled
by the Master. He has written a book and had it published by Messrs.
Longmans Green & Co., London. He finds Self-Realisation hard to
attain and requires the Master’s help. His question: “The upanishadic
method of meditation has now disappeared. There was a great sage
in Bengal who instructed me in it. After long years of discipline and
practice I am having some mystic experiences. I feel sometimes that
Bhuma (Supreme Consciousness) is infinitude and that I am finite
consciousness. Is that correct?”
M.: Bhuma (Perfection) alone is. It is Infinite. There arises from it
this finite consciousness taking on an upadhi (limiting adjunct).
This is abhasa or reflection. Merge this individual consciousness
into the Supreme One. That is what should be done.
D.: Bhuma is an attribute of Supreme Consciousness.
M.: Bhuma is the Supreme - yatra naanyat pasyati yatra naanyat
srunoti sa bhuma (where one does not see any other, hears nothing,
it is Perfection). It is indefinable and indescribable. It is as it is.
D.: There is a vastness experienced. Probably it is just below Bhuma
but close to it. Am I right?
M.: Bhuma alone is. Nothing else. It is the mind, which says all this.
D.: Transcending the mind I feel the vastness.
M.: Yes, Yes....
The professor turned to the lady seated just a little further away from
him and interpreted in Hindi to her.
She: What is the difference between meditation and distraction?
M.: No difference. When there are thoughts, it is distraction: when
there are no thoughts, it is meditation. However, meditation is only
practice (as distinguished from the real state of Peace.)
She: How to practice meditation?
M.: Keep off thoughts.
She: How to reconcile work with meditation?

M.: Who is the worker? Let him who works ask the question. You are
always the Self. You are not the mind. It is the mind which raises
these questions. Work proceeds, always in the presence of the Self
only. Work is no hindrance to realisation. It is the mistaken identity
of the worker that troubles one. Get rid of the false identity.
The Professor: Is not the state of non-consciousness close to Infinite
Consciousness?
M.: Consciousness alone remains and nothing more.
D.: Sri Bhagavan’s silence is itself a powerful force. It brings about
a certain peace of mind in us.
M.: Silence is never-ending speech. Vocal speech obstructs the other
speech of silence. In silence one is in intimate contact with the
surroundings. The silence of Dakshinamurti removed the doubts of
the four sages. Mouna vyakhya prakatita tatvam (Truth expounded
by silence.) Silence is said to be exposition. Silence is so potent.
For vocal speech, organs of speech are necessary and they precede
speech. But the other speech lies even beyond thought. It is in short
transcendent speech or unspoken words, para vak.
D.: Is there knowledge in Realisation?
M.: Absence of knowledge is sleep. There is knowledge in Realisation.
But this knowledge differs from the ordinary one of the relation
of subject and object. It is absolute knowledge. Knowledge has
two meanings:
(1) vachyartha = vritti = Literal meaning.
(2) lakshyartha = Jnana = Self = Swarupa = Secondary significance.
D.: With vritti one sees knowledge.
M.: Quite so, he also confounds vritti with knowledge. Vritti is a mode
of mind. You are not the mind. You are beyond it.
The Lady: There is sometimes an irresistible desire to remain in
Brahma-akara-vritti.
M.: It is good. It must be cultivated until it becomes sahaja (natural).
Then it culminates as swarupa, one’s own self.
Later Sri Bhagavan explained: Vritti is often mistaken for
consciousness. It is only a phenomenon and operates in the region

of abhasa (reflected consciousness). The knowledge lies beyond
relative knowledge and ignorance. It is not in the shape of vritti.
There are no subject and object in it.
Vritti belongs to the rajasic (active) mind. The satvic mind (mind is
repose) is free from it. The satvic is the witness of the rajasic. It is
no doubt true consciousness. Still it is called satvic mind because
the knowledge of being witness is the function of abhasa (reflected
consciousness) only. Mind is the abhasa. Such knowledge implies
mind. But the mind is by itself inoperative. Therefore it is called
satvic mind.
Such is the jivanmukta’s state. It is also said that his mind is dead.
Is it not a paradox that a jivanmukta has a mind and that it is dead?
This has to be conceded in argument with ignorant folk.
It is also said that Brahman is only the jivanmukta’s mind. How can
one speak of him as Brahmavid (knower of Brahman). Brahman
can never be an object to be known. This is, however, in accordance
with common parlance.
Satvic mind is surmised of the jivanmukta and of Iswara.
“Otherwise,” they argue, “how does the jivanmukta live and act?”
The satvic mind has to be admitted as a concession to argument.
The satvic mind is in fact the Absolute consciousness. The object to
be witnessed and the witness finally merge together and Absolute
consciousness alone reigns supreme. It is not a state of sunya
(blank) or ignorance. It is the swarupa (Real Self). Some say that
mind arises from consciousness followed by reflection (abhasa);
others say that the abhasa (reflection) arises first followed by the
mind. In fact both are simultaneous.
The Professor asked Sri Bhagavan to extend His Grace to him
although he would soon be a thousand miles off. Sri Bhagavan
said that time and space are only concepts of mind. But swarupa
(the Real Self) lies beyond mind, time and space. Distance does
not count in the Self.
The lady with him was most reluctant to leave the Master and return
home. The Master said, “Think that you are always in my presence.
That will make you feel right.” They left after dusk.

Talk 69.
There were reports of the above said Professor’s University lectures in
the Hindu. The lecturer had emphasised the necessity for birth control
and discussed the various possibilities of making the man feel his
responsibilities so that birth control might be automatic. The Master,
on hearing it, casually remarked. “Let them find out the method of
dying.” [Here death refers to that of the ego (ahankar).]

Talk 70.
24th July, 1935
Sri Raju Sastrigal asked Sri Bhagavan about nada, bindu and kala.
M.: They are in Vedanta terminology prana, mana, buddhi (the
life-current, mind and intellect). In the Tantras nada is said to be
subtle sound with tejas - light - in it. This light is said to be the
body of Siva. When it develops and sound is submerged, it becomes
bindu. To be full of light (tejomaya) is the aim. Kala is a part of
the bindu.
Talk 71.

Chronological Sequence of the Master’s
Stay in Different Places at Tiruvannamalai
1896. Arrived at Tiruvannamalai and stayed in the temple premises,
beneath the tree, in the interior of the underground cellar, Pathala
Lingam, sometimes in the gopurams, etc.
1897 (early), removed to Gurumurtam. Stayed in the shrine and in
the adjoining mango grove (18 months).
1898 (September) in Pavalakunru.
1899 (February) on the hill in caves, the mango tree cave and
Virupaksha cave.
1905. Stayed in Pachiamman Koil for six months during the plague
ravages. Again on the hill.
1908. January, February and March in Pachiamman Koil. Again on
the hill.

1916. Skandasramam.
1922. The Ramanasramam site on the southern slope of the Hill.

Talk 72.
25th September, 1935
Mr. K. S. N. Iyer, a railway officer, asked about japa.
M.: The utterance and then remembrance and later meditation are the
successive stages finally ending in involuntary and eternal japa. The
japakarta (doer of japa) of that kind is the Self. Of all the japas,
‘Who am I?’ is the best.

Talk 73.
27th September, 1935
Mr. Ekanatha Rao, the engineer, asked, “What about the despondency
of not obtaining any encouragement from the Master - much less his
Grace?”
M.: It is ignorance only. The quest must be made as to who is
despondent and so on. It is the phantom of the ego arising after
sleep which falls a prey to such thoughts. In deep sleep the person
was not afflicted. Who is afflicted now while awake? The sleep
state is about the normal one. Let him search and find out.
D.: But there is no incentive for want of encouragement.
M.: Does not one find some kind of peace while in meditation? That is
the sign of progress. That peace will be deeper and more prolonged
with continued practice. It will also lead to the goal. Bhagavad
Gita - Chapter XIV - the final verses speak of gunatita (one who
has transcended the gunas). That is the final stage.
The earlier stages are asuddha satva (impure being), misra satva
(mixed being), and suddha satva (Pure Being).
Of these, the impure being is when overpowered by rajas and tamas;
the mixed being is that state in which the being - satva - asserts itself
spasmodically; the suddha satva overpowers rajas and tamas. After
these successive stages there comes the state transcending gunas.

Talk 74.
Mr. Frydman, the engineer, writes in one of his letters: “Maharshi is
with me not only when I think of Him but also when I am not thinking
of Him. Otherwise, how do I live?”
Talk 75.
Mr. Grant Duff, formerly in a foreign embassy, writes: .... Pay my
respects to Maharshi. He appears to me in my thoughts not only as
an answer to my questions but also as Presence....

Talk 76.
29th September, 1935
Mr. K. S. N. Iyer said that he was not convinced how spiritual life
could be reconciled to worldly activities. The Master in answer cited
some verses from Yoga Vasishta. (The original is said to be millions
of verses, of which only 32,000 stanzas are now found in the Sanskrit
text. It was condensed to 6,000 and called Laghu Vasishta. The latter
has been rendered in Tamil in 2,050 stanzas).
D.: Without the mind concentrating on it the work cannot be performed
satisfactorily. How is the mind to be spiritually disposed and the
work kept going as well?
M.: The mind is only a projection from the Self, appearing in the
waking state. In deep sleep, you do not say whose son you are
and so on. As soon as you wake up you say you are so and so, and
recognise the world and so on. The world is only lokah, lokah =
lokyate iti lokah (what is perceived is the world). That which is seen
is lokah or the world. Which is the eye that sees it? That is the ego
which rises and sinks periodically. But you exist always. Therefore
That which lies beyond the ego is consciousness - the Self.
In deep sleep mind is merged and not destroyed. That which merges
reappears. It may happen in meditation also. But the mind which is
destroyed cannot reappear. The yogi’s aim must be to destroy it and
not to sink in laya. In the peace of dhyana, laya ensues but it is not
enough. It must be supplemented by other practices for destroying the
mind. Some people have gone into samadhi with a trifling thought

and after a long time awakened in the trail of the same thought. In the
meantime generations have passed away in the world. Such a yogi has
not destroyed his mind. Its destruction is the non-recognition of it as
being apart from the Self. Even now the mind is not. Recognise it. How
can you do it if not in everyday activities. They go on automatically.
Know that the mind promoting them is not real but a phantom
proceeding from the Self. That is how the mind is destroyed.
Talk 77.
The Master, while referring to the Bible for “Be still and know that
I am God”, Psalm 46, found in the Ecclesiastes. “There is one alone
and there is no second” and “The wise man’s heart is at the right hand
and a fool’s heart is at the left.”
Talk 78.
A man from Masulla asked the Master: “How to realise the Self?”
M.: Everyone has experience of the Self every moment of his life.
D.: But the Self is not realised as one would like.
M.: Yes. The present experience is viparita - different from real. What
is not is confounded with what is.
D.: How to find the Atman?
M.: There is no investigation into the Atman. The investigation can only
be into the non-self. Elimination of the non-self is alone possible.
The Self being always self evident will shine forth of itself.
The Self is called by different names - Atman, God, Kundalini,
mantra, etc. Hold any one of them and the Self becomes manifest.
God is no other than the Self. Kundalini is now showing forth as the
mind. When the mind is traced to its source it is Kundalini. Mantra
japa leads to elimination of other thoughts and to concentration
on the mantra. The mantra finally merges into the Self and shines
forth as the Self.
D.: How long is a Guru necessary for Self-Realisation?
M.: Guru is necessary so long as there is the laghu. (Pun on Guru =
heavy; laghu = light). Laghu is due to the self-imposed but wrong
limitation of the Self. God, on being worshipped, bestows steadiness

in in devotion which leads to surrender. On the devotee surrendering,
God shows His mercy by manifesting as the Guru. The Guru, otherwise
God, guides the devotee, saying that God is in you and He is the Self.
This leads to introversion of the mind and finally to realisation.
Effort is necessary up to the state of realisation. Even then the Self
should spontaneously become evident. Otherwise happiness will
not be complete. Up to that state of spontaneity there must be effort
in some form or another.
D.: Our work-a-day life is not compatible with such efforts.
M.: Why do you think that you are active? Take the gross example of
your arrival here. You left home in a cart, took train, alighted at the
Railway Station here, got into a cart there and found yourself in this
Asramam. When asked, you say that you travelled here all the way
from your town. Is it true? Is it not a fact that you remained as you
were and there were movements of conveyances all along the way.
Just as those movements are confounded with your own, so also the
other activities. They are not your own. They are God’s activities.
D.: Such idea will lead to blankness of mind and the work will not
progress well.
M.: Go up to that blankness and tell me afterwards.
D.: They say that a visit to Sages helps Self-Realisation?
M.: Yes. So it does.
D.: Will not my present visit to you bring it about?
M.: (After a short pause) What is to be brought about? To whom?
Consider; investigate. To whom is this doubt. If the source is traced
the doubt will disappear.
Talk 79.
An engineer asked: “The animals seem to conform to their own natural
laws in spite of their environment and changes. Whereas man flouts
social law and is not bound by any definite system. He seems to be
degenerating whereas the animals are steady. Is it not so?”
M.: (After a long time). The Upanishads and scriptures say that human
beings are only animals unless they are realised beings. Possibly
they are worse also.

Talk 80.
3rd October, 1935
A very devoted and simple disciple had lost his only son, a child of
three years. The next day he arrived at the Asramam with his family.
The Master spoke with reference to them: “Training of mind helps
one to bear sorrows and bereavements with courage. But the loss of
one’s offspring is said to be the worst of all griefs. Grief exists only
so long as one considers oneself to be of a definite form. If the form is
transcended one will know that the one Self is eternal. There is no death
nor birth. That which is born is only the body. The body is the creation
of the ego. But the ego is not ordinarily perceived without the body.
It is always identified with the body. It is the thought which matters.
Let the sensible man consider if he knew his body in deep sleep. Why
does he feel it in the waking state? But, although the body was not felt
in sleep, did not the Self exist then? How was he in deep sleep? How
is he when awake? What is the difference? Ego rises up and that is
waking. Simultaneously thoughts arise. Let him find out to whom are
the thoughts. Wherefrom do they arise? They must spring up from the
conscious Self. Apprehending it even vaguely helps the extinction of
the ego. Thereafter the realisation of the one Infinite Existence becomes
possible. In that state there are no individuals other than the Eternal
Existence. Hence there is no thought of death or wailing.
“If a man considers he is born he cannot avoid the fear of death.
Let him find out if he has been born or if the Self has any birth. He
will discover that the Self always exists, that the body which is born
resolves itself into thought and that the emergence of thought is the
root of all mischief. Find wherefrom thoughts emerge. Then you will
abide in the ever-present inmost Self and be free from the idea of birth
or the fear of death.”
A disciple asked how to do it.
M.: The thoughts are only vasanas (predispositions), accumulated in
innumerable births before. Their annihilation is the aim. The state
free from vasanas is the primal state and eternal state of purity.
D.: It is not clear yet.

M.: Everyone is aware of the eternal Self. He sees so many dying but
still believes himself eternal. Because it is the Truth. Unwillingly the
natural Truth asserts itself. The man is deluded by the intermingling of
the conscious Self with the insentient body. This delusion must end.
D.: How will it end?
M.: That which is born must end. The delusion is only concomitant
with the ego. It rises up and sinks. But the Reality never rises nor
sinks. It remains Eternal. The master who has realised says so; the
disciple hears, thinks over the words and realises the Self. There
are two ways of putting it.
The ever-present Self needs no efforts to be realised, Realisation is
already there. Illusion alone is to be removed. Some say the word
from the mouth of the Master removes it instantaneously. Others
say that meditation, etc., are necessary for realisation. Both are
right; only the standpoints differ.
D.: Is dhyana necessary?
M.: The Upanishads say that even the Earth is in eternal dhyana.
D.: How does Karma help it? Will it not add to the already heavy
load to be removed?
M.: Karma done unselfishly purifies the mind and helps to fix it in
meditation.
D.: What if one meditates incessantly without Karma?
M.: Try and see. The vasanas will not let you do it. Dhyana comes
only step by step with the gradual weakening of the vasanas by
the Grace of the Master.

Talk 81.
15th October, 1935
Dr. Bernhard Bey, an American Chemist who had interested himself
in Vedanta for the last twenty years, now in India, came on a visit to
the Master. He asked: “How is abhyasa to be made? I am trying to
find the Light.” (He himself explained abhyasa as concentration =
one-pointedness of mind.)
The Master asked, what was his abhyasa till now.

The visitor said he concentrated on the nasal base, but his mind wandered.
M.: Is there a mind?
Another devotee gently put in: The mind is only a collection of
thoughts.
M.: To whom are the thoughts? If you try to locate the mind, the mind
vanishes and the Self alone remains. Being alone, there can be no
one-pointedness or otherwise.
D.: It is so difficult to understand this. If something concrete is said,
it can be readily grasped. Japa, dhyana, etc., are more concrete.
M.: ‘Who am I?’ is the best japa.
What could be more concrete than the Self? It is within each one’s
experience every moment. Why should he try to catch anything
outside, leaving out the Self? Let each one try to find out the known
Self instead of searching for the unknown something beyond.
D.: Where shall I meditate on the Atman? I mean in which part of
the body?
M.: The Self should manifest itself. That is all that is wanted.
A devotee gently added: On the right of the chest, there is the Heart,
the seat of the Atman.
Another devotee: The illumination is in that centre when the Self
is realised.
M.: Quite so.
D.: How to turn the mind away from the world?
M.: Is there the world? I mean apart from the Self? Does the world
say that it exists? It is you who say that there is a world. Find out
the Self who says it.

Talk 82.
16th October, 1935
A question was raised about the differences in the various samadhis.
M.: When the senses are merged in darkness it is deep sleep; when
merged in light it is samadhi. Just as a passenger when asleep in a
carriage is unaware of the motion, the halting or the unharnessing
of the horses, so also a Jnani in sahaja samadhi is unaware of the

happenings, waking, dream and deep sleep. Here sleep corresponds
to the unharnessing of the horses. And samadhi corresponds to the
halting of the horses, because the senses are ready to act just as the
horses are ready to move after halting.
In samadhi the head does not bend down because the senses are
there though inactive; whereas the head bends down in sleep because
the senses are merged in darkness. In kevala samadhi, the activities
(vital and mental), waking, dream and sleep, are only merged, ready
to emerge after regaining the state other than samadhi. In sahaja
samadhi the activities, vital and mental, and the three states are
destroyed, never to reappear. However, others notice the Jnani active
e.g., eating, talking, moving etc. He is not himself aware of these
activities, whereas others are aware of his activities. They pertain to
his body and not to his Real Self, swarupa. For himself, he is like
the sleeping passenger - or like a child interrupted from sound sleep
and fed, being unaware of it. The child says the next day that he did
not take milk at all and that he went to sleep without it. Even when
reminded he cannot be convinced. So also in sahaja samadhi.
Sushumna pare leena. Here sushumna refers to tapo marge whereas
the para nadi refers to jnana marga.
Talk 83.
The Master relating some stories of the bhaktas told how Sri Krishna
served Eknath for twelve years, how Panduranga relieved Sakku Bai
from her home prison and enabled her to visit Pandharpur.
Then he recollected the appearance of a mysterious Moulvi on his
way from Madura to Tiruvannamalai in 1896, how he appeared, spoke
and disappeared suddenly.
Talk 84.
Mr. Grant Duff asked the Master if any mongoose had had anything to do
with him. The Master said, “Yes. It was the occasion of Ardra and Jayanti, I
was living up the hill in Skandasramam. Streams of visitors were climbing
up the hill from the town A mongoose, larger than the ordinary size, of
golden hue (not grey as a mongoose is), with no black spot on its tail as
is usual with the wild mongoose, passed these crowds fearlessly. People

took it to be a tame one belonging to someone in the crowd. The animal
went straight to Palaniswami, who was having a bath in the spring by the
Virupaksha Cave. He stroked the creature and patted it. It followed him
into the cave, inspected every nook and corner and left the place and joined
the crowd to pass up to Skandasramam. I noticed it. Everyone was struck
by its attractive appearance and its fearless movements. It came up to me,
got on my lap and rested there some time. Then it raised itself up, looked
about and moved down; it went round the whole place and I followed it
lest it should be harmed by the unwary visitors or by the peacocks. Two
peacocks of the place looked at it inquisitively, whereas the mongoose
moved nonchalantly from place to place and finally disappeared into the
rocks on the south-east of the Asramam.”
Talk 85.
The same gentleman asked the Master about the material relation
between memory and will and their relation to the mind.
M.: They are functions of the mind The mind is the outcome of the
ego and the ego is from the Self.

Talk 86.
6th November, 1935
The Master gave the true significance of the Christian faith thus:
Christ is the ego.
The Cross is the body.
When the ego is crucified, and it perishes, what survives is the
Absolute Being (God), (cf. “I and my Father are one”) and this
glorious survival is called Resurrection.
Talk 87.
Major A. W. Chadwick, an ardent English devotee, asked, “Why did
Jesus call out ‘My God! My God!’ while being crucified?”
M.: It might have been an intercession on behalf of the two thieves
who were crucified with Him. Again a Jnani has attained liberation
even while alive, here and now. It is immaterial as to how, where and
when he leaves his body. Some jnanis may appear to suffer, others

may be in samadhi, still others may disappear from sight before
death. But that makes no difference to their jnana. Such suffering is
apparent only to the onlooker and not to the Jnani, for he has already
transcended the mistaken identity of the Self with the body.
Talk 88.
The same gentleman asked: What is the significance of Christ in the
illumination of St. Paul?
M.: Illumination is absolute, not associated with forms. After St.
Paul became Self-conscious he identified the illumination with
Christ-consciousness.
D.: But Paul was not a lover of Christ then?
M.: Love or hatred is immaterial. The thought of Christ was there. It is
similar to Ravana’s case. Christ-consciousness and Self-Realisation
are all the same.
Talk 89.
M.: Karpura arati is symbolic of the burning away of the mind by the
light of illumination, vibhuti (sacred ashes) is Siva (Absolute Being)
and kunkuma (vermilion powder) is Sakti (consciousness).
Vibhuti is of two kinds: Para vibhuti and apara vibhuti. The sacred
ashes are of the latter class. The para is what remains over after
all the dross has been burnt away by the Fire of Realisation. It is
Absolute Being.
Talk 90.
Again, the Trinity was explained:
God the Father represents Isvara
God the Holy Spirit represents Atman
God the Son represents Guru
Isvaro gururatmeti murti bheda vibhagine vyomavad vyapta dehaya
dakshinamurtaye namah:
Meaning that God appears to his devotee in the form of a Guru (son
of God) and points out to him the immanence of the Holy Spirit. That
is to say that God is spirit, that this spirit is immanent everywhere and
that the Self must be realised, which is the same as realising God.

Talk 91.
A Bengali visitor asked: How is the mind controlled?
M.: What do you call ‘the mind’?
D.: When I sit down to think of God, thoughts wander away to other
objects. I want to control those thoughts.
M.: In the Bhagavad Gita it is said that it is the nature of the mind
to wander. One must bring one’s thoughts to bear on God. By long
practice the mind is controlled and made steady.
The wavering of the mind is a weakness arising from the dissipation of
its energy in the shape of thoughts. When one makes the mind stick to
one thought the energy is conserved, and the mind becomes stronger.
D.: What is the meaning of the strength of the mind?
M.: Its ability to concentrate on one thought without being
distracted.
D.: How is that achieved?
M.: By practice. A devotee concentrates on God; a seeker, follower of the
jnana-marga, seeks the Self. The practice is equally difficult for both.
D.: Even if the mind is brought to bear on the search for the Self,
after a long struggle the mind begins to elude him and the man is
not aware of the mischief until after some time.
M.: So it would be. In the earlier stages the mind reverts to the search at
long intervals; with continued practice it reverts at shorter intervals until
finally it does not wander at all. It is then that the dormant sakti manifests.
The satvic mind is free from thoughts whereas the rajasic mind is full
of them. The sattvic mind resolves itself into the Life-current.
D.: Can one keep the mind away from entering into the phase of
thoughts before one experiences the current?
M.: Yes; the current is pre-existent.

Talk 92.
7th November, 1935
A visitor said: Some say that one should practise meditation on gross objects
only: it may be disastrous if one constantly seeks to kill the mind.
M.: For whom is it disastrous? Can there be disaster apart from the Self?

Unbroken ‘I-I’ is the ocean infinite, the ego, ‘I’ thought, remains only
a bubble on it and is called jiva, i.e., individual soul. The bubble
too is water; when it bursts it only mixes in the ocean. When it
remains a bubble it is still a part of the ocean. Ignorant of this simple
truth, innumerable methods under different denominations, such as
yoga, bhakti, karma....... each again with many modifications, are
being taught with great skill and in intricate detail only to entice
the seekers and confuse their minds. So also are the religions and
sects and dogmas. What are they all for? Only for knowing the Self.
They are aids and practices required for knowing the Self.
Objects perceived by the senses are spoken of as immediate knowledge
(pratyaksha). Can anything be as direct as the Self - always experienced
without the aid of the senses? Sense-perceptions can only be indirect
knowledge, and not direct knowledge. Only one’s own awareness is
direct knowledge, as is the common experience of one and all. No aids
are needed to know one’s own Self, i.e., to be aware.
The one Infinite Unbroken Whole (plenum) becomes aware of
itself as ‘I’. This is its original name. All other names, e.g., OM,
are later growths. Liberation is only to remain aware of the Self.
The mahavakya “I am Brahman” is its authority. Though the ‘I’ is
always experienced, yet one’s attention has to be drawn to it. Only
then does knowledge dawn. Thus the need for the instruction of
the Upanishads and of wise sages.

Talk 93.
9th November, 1935
All are aware of their own Self only. Wonder of wonders! They take
what is not as what is, or they see the phenomena apart from the Self.
Only so long as there is the knower is there knowledge of all kinds
(direct, inferential, intellectual etc.); should the knower vanish they all
vanish together with him; their validity is of the same degree as his.
Talk 94.
A man prayed to the Master to pardon his sins. He was told that it would
be enough if he took care to see that his mind did not trouble him.

Talk 95.
13th November, 1935
A question was raised as follows by Maj. A. W. Chadwick :-
Mr. Edward Carpenter, a certain mystic, has written in a book that
he had Self-Realisation on some occasions and that its effects lasted
sometimes afterwards, only to be gradually lost. Whereas Sri Ramana
Gita says, “Granthi (knot = bondage), snapped once, is snapped for
ever.” In the case of this mystic, the bondage seems to have persisted
even after Self-Realisation. How can it be so?
The Master cited Kaivalya as follows:-
The disciple, after realising the all-shining, unitary, unbroken state
of Being-Knowledge-Bliss, surrendered himself to the master and
humbly prayed to know how he could repay the master’s Grace.
The Master said:
“My reward consists in your permanent unbroken Bliss. Do not
slip away from it.”
D.: Having once experienced the Supreme Bliss, how can one stray
away from it?
M.: Oh yes! It happens. The predisposition adhering to him from time
immemorial will draw him out and so ignorance overtakes him.
D.: What are the obstacles to remaining steady in unbroken Bliss?
How can they be overcome?
M.: The obstacles are:
(1) Ignorance which is forgetfulness of one’s pure being.
(2) Doubt which consists in wondering if even the experience was
of the Real or of the unreal.
(3) Error which consists in the “I-am-the-body” idea, and thinking
that the world is real. These are overcome by hearing the truth,
reflection on it and concentration.
The Master continued: Experience is said to be temporary or
permanent. The first experience is temporary and by concentration it
can become permanent. In the former the bondage is not completely

completely destroyed; it remains subtle and reasserts itself in due
course. But in the latter it is destroyed root and branch, never
to appear again. The expression yogabhrashta (those who have
fallen down from yoga) in Srimad Bhagavad Gita refers to the
former class of men.
D.: Is then hearing the Truth meant only for a limited few?
M.: It is of two kinds. The ordinary one is to hear it enunciated
and explained by a master. However, the right one is to raise the
question for oneself and seek and find the answer in oneself as
the unbroken ‘I-I’.
To be reflecting on this experience is the second stage. To remain
one-pointed in it is the third stage.
D.: Can the temporary experience be called samadhi?
M.: No. It forms part of the third stage.
D.: It looks then as if even hearing the Truth is limited to a very few.
M.: The seekers fall into two classes; kritopasaka and akritopasaka.
The former having already overcome his predisposition by
steady devotion, his mind thus made pure, has had some kind of
experience but does not comprehend it; as soon as he is instructed
by a competent master, permanent experience results.
The other class of seeker needs great effort to achieve this end.
How will the hearing of the Truth, reflection and concentration
help him?
They comprise upasana (the nearest approach to Truth) and will
end in his Self-Realization.
The fourth stage is the final one of liberation. Even there some
distinction is made according to the degree, as
(1) the knower of the Brahman (Brahmavid)
(2) Brahmavid-vara
(3) Brahmavid-varya
(4) Brahmavid-varishta
But all of them are in fact liberated even while alive.

Talk 96.
Maj. A. W. Chadwick: Of what nature is the realisation of Westerners
who relate that they have had flashes of cosmic consciousness?
M.: It came as a flash and disappeared as such. That which
has a beginning must also end. Only when the ever-present
consciousness is realised will it be permanent. Consciousness
is indeed always with us. Everyone knows ‘I am!’ No one can
deny his own being. The man in deep slumber is not aware;
while awake he seems to be aware. But it is the same person.
There is no change in the one who slept and the one who
is now awake. In deep sleep he was not aware of his body;
there was no body-consciousness. In the wakeful state he is
aware of his body; there is body-consciousness. Therefore
the difference lies in the emergence of body-consciousness
and not in any change in the Real Consciousness. The body
and body-consciousness arise together and sink together. All
this amounts to saying that there are no limitations in deep
sleep, whereas there are limitations in the waking state. These
limitations are the bondage; the feeling ‘The body is I’ is the
error. This false sense of ‘I’ must go. The real ‘I’ is always
there. It is here and now. It never appears anew and disappears
again. That which is must also persist for ever. That which appears
anew will also be lost. Compare deep sleep and waking. The body
appears in one state but not in the other. Therefore the body will
be lost. The consciousness was pre-existent and will survive the
body. In fact, there is no one who does not say ‘I am’. The wrong
knowledge of ‘I am the body’ is the cause of all the mischief.
This wrong knowledge must go. That is Realisation. Realisation
is not acquisition of anything new nor it is a new faculty. It is
only removal of all camouflage.
Maj. Chadwick: I try to shake off the body.
M.: A man shakes off his clothes and remains alone and free. The
Self is unlimited and is not confined to the body. How can the
body be shaken off? Where will he leave it? Wherever it is, it is
his still.
Maj. Chadwick: (Laughter.)

M.: The ultimate Truth is so simple. It is nothing more than being in
the pristine state. This is all that need be said.
Still, it is a wonder that to teach this simple Truth there should
come into being so many religions, creeds, methods and disputes
among them and so on! Oh the pity! Oh the pity!
Maj. Chadwick: But people will not be content with simplicity; they
want complexity.
M.: Quite so. Because they want something elaborate and attractive
and puzzling, so many religions have come into existence and each
of them is so complex and each creed in each religion has its own
adherents and antagonists.
For example, an ordinary Christian will not be satisfied unless he is
told that God is somewhere in the far-off Heavens not to be reached
by us unaided. Christ alone knew Him and Christ alone can guide
us. Worship Christ and be saved. If told the simple truth - “The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you” - he is not satisfied and will
read complex and far-fetched meanings in such statements. Mature
minds alone can grasp the simple Truth in all its nakedness.
Maj. Chadwick later expressed a certain involuntary fear while
meditating. He feels the spirit separated from the gross body and
the sensation creates a fright.
M.: To whom is the fright? It is all due to the habit of identifying the
body with the Self. Repeated experience of separation will make
one familiar and the fright will cease.

Talk 97.
19th November, 1935
One Mr. Ramachandar, a gentleman from Ambala, asked where the
Heart is and what Realisation is.
M.: The Heart is not physical; it is spiritual. Hridayam = hrit + ayam
- This is the centre. It is that from which thoughts arise, on which
they subsist and where they are resolved. The thoughts are the
content of the mind and, they shape the universe. The Heart is
the centre of all. Yatova imani bhutani jayante (that from which

these beings come into existence) etc. is said to be Brahman in the
Upanishads. That is the Heart. Brahman is the Heart.
D.: How to realise the Heart?
M.: There is no one who even for a trice fails to experience the Self.
For no one admits that he ever stands apart from the Self. He is the
Self. The Self is the Heart.
D.: It is not clear.
M.: In deep sleep you exist; awake, you remain. The same Self is in
both states. The difference is only in the awareness and the non-awareness
of the world. The world rises with the mind and sets
with the mind. That which rises and sets is not the Self. The Self is
different, giving rise to the mind, sustaining it and resolving it. So
the Self is the underlying principle.
When asked who you are, you place your hand on the right side of
the breast and say ‘I am’. There you involuntarily point out the Self.
The Self is thus known. But the individual is miserable because he
confounds the mind and the body with the Self. This confusion is
due to wrong knowledge. Elimination of wrong knowledge is alone
needed. Such elimination results in Realisation.
D.: How to control the mind?
M.: What is mind? Whose is the mind?
D.: Mind always wanders. I cannot control it.
M.: It is the nature of the mind to wander. You are not the mind. The
mind springs up and sinks down. It is impermanent, transitory,
whereas you are eternal. There is nothing but the Self. To inhere in
the Self is the thing. Never mind the mind. If its source is sought,
it will vanish leaving the Self unaffected.
D.: So one need not seek to control the mind?
M.: There is no mind to control if you realise the Self. The mind
vanishing, the Self shines forth. In the realised man the mind may
be active or inactive, the Self alone remains for him. For the mind,
the body and the world are not separate from the Self. They rise
from and sink into the Self. They do not remain apart from the Self.
Can they be different from the Self? Only be aware of the Self. Why
worry about these shadows? How do they affect the Self?

Talk 98.
Bhagavan further explained: The Self is the Heart. The Heart is sel-fluminous.
Light arises from the Heart and reaches the brain, which is
the seat of the mind. The world is seen with the mind, that is, by the
reflected light of the Self. It is perceived with the aid of the mind. When
the mind is illumined it is aware of the world. When it is not itself so
illumined, it is not aware of the world. If the mind is turned in towards
the source of light, objective knowledge ceases and Self alone shines
forth as the Heart.
The moon shines by the reflected light of the sun. When the sun has
set, the moon is useful for revealing objects. When the sun has risen,
no one needs the moon, although the pale disc of the moon is visible
in the sky.
So it is with the mind and the Heart. The mind is useful because of its
reflected light. It is used for seeing objects. When it is turned inwards,
the source of illumination shines forth by itself, and the mind remains
dim and useless like the moon in day-time.
Talk 99.
A sannyasi asked: It is said that the Self is beyond the mind and yet
the realisation is with the mind. Mano na manute, Manasa na matam,
and Manasaivedamaptavyam (The mind cannot think it. It cannot be
thought of by the mind and the mind alone can realise it). How are
these contradictions to be reconciled?
M.: Atman is realised with mruta manas (dead mind), i.e., mind devoid
of thoughts and turned inward. Then the mind sees its own source
and becomes That. It is not as the subject perceiving an object.
When the room is dark a lamp is necessary to illumine and eyes
to cognise objects. But when the sun is risen there is no need of
a lamp, and the objects are seen; and to see the sun no lamp is
necessary, it is enough that you turn your eyes towards the selfluminous sun.
Similarly with the mind. To see the objects the reflected light of the
mind is necessary. To see the Heart it is enough that the mind is turned
towards it. Then the mind loses itself and the Heart shines forth.

Talk 100.
Later Sri Bhagavan quoted from Kaivalya some verses and explained:
A
The Supreme
(Knowledge Absolute; witness; the Self-shining core ;
the Heart; the Self)
the individual
[the jiva, the knower consisting o f vritti (the mode
of mind stu ff) and reflected light, in the latent form ]
the internal intellect and the outgoing mind
[buddhi and manas consisting of vritti and reflected light,
as a sprout, this is the antahkarana (the inner o rgan)]
modes taking shape
as objects

common
knowledge

together form the world as we perce ive it

B
The Self (Pure Knowledge)
the jiva (pramatr = the knower)
the intellect and the mind
(pramana = perception)
modes
seen as objects

knowledge
(phala chaitanya)

The modes of mind take shape as external objects and the light
reflected on the modes illumines the objects. Now neglecting the modes

of mind, look for the light illumining them. The mind becomes still
and the light remains self-shining. The undulating mind (i.e., the mind
associated with rajas = activity and tamas = darkness) is commonly
known as the mind. Devoid of rajas and tamas, it is pure and self-shining.
This is Self-Realisation. Therefore the mind is said to be the
means for it.
C
Pure Consciousness
(said to be the Eternal or the Ever-present Witness)
(antahkarana)
Inner organ + the reflected light (jiva; pramtr)
modes together with the light are said to be prameya =
the known; of these, the objects are gross and the
light is called phala chaitanya.

D
In the jiva the inner organ (antahkarana) consists of -

Satva

Rajas

Tamas

knowledge,
light

modes of mind,
intellect, mind

gross objects,
the world

Similarly for the cosmos:The Cosmic mind (the Eternal Being)
Satva

Rajas

Tamas

Isvara - the Lord
of the universe

the individual
jiva

the universe

E
Brahman =

Sat
Being, called
the adhara =
the substratum

Chit
Knowledge

Ananda
Bliss

Called visesha =
differentiation by maya
natural
the universe
or the world

artificial
multiplicity
of objects

Maya cannot obscure Sat, but it does obscure Chit and Ananda,
making them appear as particulars.
F
A rope
corresponds to

in dim light

appears as a snake

Being;
the substratum

maya
illusion

the artificial particular
as shown in E

G

Sat = Being = the substratum (adhara). From this proceeds the
particular, namely the jiva who veiled by ignorance identifies himself
with the gross body. Here ignorance stands for not investigating the
Self. Jiva is in fact knowledge only; yet owing to ignorance the wrong
identity with the gross body results.
H

Again, the Master illustrated it with the red-hot iron ball (tapta-ayahpindavat).
A ball of iron + fire together form red-hot iron ball. The World + Chit
= (Pure Knowledge) together form the jiva = the individual.

Talk 101.
A gentleman from Ambala asked: What is the rationalistic explanation
of Draupadi’s sari becoming endless?
M.: Spiritual matters cannot be fitted into rationalism. Spirituality is
transcendental. The miracle was after Draupadi had surrendered
herself. The secret lies in surrender.
D.: How to reach the Heart?
M.: Where are you now that you want to reach the Heart? Are you
standing apart from the Self?
D.: I am in my body.
M.: In a particular spot, or all over?
D.: All over. I am extending all over the body.
M.: Wherefrom do you extend?
D.: I do not know.
M.: Yes. You are always in the Heart. You are never away from it
in order that you should reach it. Consider how you are in deep
sleep and in the waking state. These states are also not yours.
They are of the ego. The consciousness remains the same and
undifferentiated all through.
D.: I understand but I cannot feel it so.
M.: Whose is the ignorance? Find it out.
D.: All this is so difficult.
M.: The idea of difficulty is itself wrong. It will not help you to gain
what you want. Again I ask: “Who finds it difficult?”
D.: I see that I am coming round to ‘I’.
M.: Because you are always that and never away from that. There
is nothing so simple as being the Self. It requires no effort, no
aid. One has to leave off the wrong identity and be in his eternal,
natural, inherent state.
Talk 102.
He returned with a request next day. He said, “It is said that one should
receive instruction from a Guru. Mere reading of books is not helpful.
I have read many books; but there is no practical help derived from

such learning. Please tell me what I should do, how I should do it, at
what times, in which places, and so on.”
The Master remained silent. His silence seemed to say, “Here and
now, be at peace and tranquil. That is all”. But the questioner could
not interpret it that way; he wanted something concrete.
Talk 103.
The next day Sri Bhagavan said: These people want some japa, dhyana,
or yoga or something similar. Without their saying what they have
been doing so far what more can be said to them? Again, why japa,
its phalasruti, etc.? Who is it that makes the japa? Who gets the fruits
thereof? Can they not look to the Self? Or again, even if instructed by
others to do japa or dhyana, they do it for some time, but are always
looking to some results, e.g., visions, dreams, or thaumaturgic powers.
If they do not find them they say they are not progressing or the tapas is
not effective. Visions, etc., are no signs of progress. Mere performance
of tapas is its progress also. Steadiness is what is required. Moreover
they must entrust themselves to their mantra or their God and wait
for its Grace. They don’t do so. Japa even once uttered has its own
good effect, whether the individual is aware or not.

Talk 104.
28th November, 1935
Mr. Kishorilal, an officer of the Railway Board, Government of India, hails
from Delhi. He looks simple, gentle and dignified in behaviour. He has
gastric ulcer and has arranged for his board and lodging in the town.
Five years ago he took up the study of devotional literature. He is a
bhakta of Sri Krishna. He could feel Krishna in all that he saw. Krishna
often appeared to him and made him happy. His work was going on
without any effort on his part. Everything seemed to be done for him
by Krishna himself.
Later he came in contact with a Mahatma who advised him to study
Vedanta and take to nirakara upasana, i.e., devotion to formless
Being. He has since read about seven hundred books of philosophy
and Vedanta, including the Upanishads, Ashtavakra, Avadhuta and

Srimad Bhagavad GitaSrimad Bhagavad Gita. He has also studied
Sri Bhagavan’s works in English and is much impressed by them.
Once when he was in the jaws of death, no other thought haunted him but
that he had not yet visited Sri Bhagavan in his life. So he has come here on
a short visit. He prays only for Sri Bhagavan’s touch and His Grace.
The Master said to him: atmaivaham gudakesa, i.e., I am Atman;
Atman is the Guru; and Atman is Grace also. No one remains without
the Atman. He is always in contact. No external touch is necessary.
D.: I understand. I do not mean external touch.
M.: Nothing is more intimate than the Atman.
D.: Again Sri Krishna appeared to me three months back and said, “Why do
you ask me for nirakara upasana? It is only sarva bhutesu cha atmanam
sarva bhutani cha atmani. (The Self in all and all in the Self.)
M.: That contains the whole truth. Even this is oupacharika (indirect).
There is in fact nothing but the Atman. The world is only a
projection of the mind. The mind originates from the Atman. So
Atman alone is the One Being.
D.: Yet it is difficult to realise.
M.: There is nothing to realise. It is nitya suddha buddha mukta (the
Eternal, pure, aware and liberated) state. It is natural and eternal.
There is nothing new to gain. On the other hand a man must loose
his ignorance. That is all.
This ignorance must be traced to its origin. To whom is this ignorance?
Of what is one ignorant? There are the subject and the object. Such
duality is characteristic of the mind. The mind is from the Atman.
D.: Yes. Ignorance itself cannot exist. (He finally surrendered saying,
“Just as a doctor learns what is wrong with the patient and treats him
accordingly, so may Sri Bhagavan do with me”. He also said that
he had lost all inclination to study books and learn from them.)
Talk 105.
M.: Yena asrutam srutam bhavati (Chandogya Upanishad). (By
knowing which, all the unknown becomes known.)
Madhavaswami, Bhagavan’s attendant: Are there nine methods of teaching
the Mahavakya ‘Tattvamasi’ in the Chandogya Upanishad?

M.: No. Not so. The method is only one. Uddalaka started teaching Sat eva
Somya (There is only Being ) illustrating it with Svetaketu’s fast.
(1) Sat, the Being in the individual, is made obvious by the fast.
(2) This (sat) Being is similar in all, as honey gathered from different
flowers.
(3) There is no difference in the sat of individuals as illustrated by
the state of deep sleep. The question arises - if so, why does not
each know it in sleep?
(4) Because the individuality is lost. There is only sat left. Illustration:
rivers lost in the ocean. If lost, is there sat?
(5) Surely - as when a tree is pruned it grows again. That is a sure
sign of its life. But is it there even in that dormant condition?
(6) Yes, take the instance of salt and water. The presence of the salt in
water is subtle. Though invisible to the eye it is recognised by other
senses. How is one to know it? What is the other means?
(7) By enquiry, as the man left in the Gandhara forest regained his
home.
(8) In evolution and involution, in manifestation and resolution, sat alone
exists. Tejah parasyam, devatayam (the light merges in the Supreme).
(9) An insincere man is hurt by the touch of fire test. His insincerity
is brought out by fire. Sincerity is Self-evident. A true man or a Self
realised man remains happy, without being affected by the false
appearances (namely the world, birth and death, etc.), whereas the
false or ignorant man is miserable.

Talk 106.
29th November, 1935
Swami Yogananda with four others arrived at 8.45 a.m. He looks big,
but gentle and well-groomed. He has dark flowing hair, hanging over
his shoulders. The group had lunch in the Asramam.
Mr. C. R. Wright, his secretary, asked: How shall I realise God?
M.: God is an unknown entity. Moreover He is external. Whereas, the
Self is always with you and it is you. Why do you leave out what
is intimate and go in for what is external?

D.: What is this Self again?
M.: The Self is known to everyone but not clearly. You always
exist. The Be-ing is the Self. ‘I am’ is the name of God. Of all
the definitions of God, none is indeed so well put as the Biblical
statement “I AM THAT I AM” in EXODUS (Chap. 3). There are
other statements, such as Brahmaivaham, Aham Brahmasmi and
Soham. But none is so direct as the name JEHOVAH = I AM. The
Absolute Being is what is - It is the Self. It is God. Knowing the
Self, God is known. In fact God is none other than the Self.
D.: Why are there good and evil?
M.: They are relative terms. There must be a subject to know the good
and evil. That subject is the ego. Trace the source of the ego. It ends
in the Self. The source of the ego is God. This definition of God is
probably more concrete and better understood by you.
D.: So it is. How to get Bliss?
M.: Bliss is not something to be got. On the other hand you are always
Bliss. This desire is born of the sense of incompleteness. To whom is
this sense of incompleteness? Enquire. In deep sleep you were blissful:
Now you are not so. What has interposed between that Bliss and this
non-bliss? It is the ego. Seek its source and find you are Bliss.
There is nothing new to get. You have, on the other hand, to get rid
of your ignorance which makes you think that you are other than
Bliss. For whom is this ignorance? It is to the ego. Trace the source
of the ego. Then the ego is lost and Bliss remains over. It is eternal.
You are That, here and now.… That is the master key for solving all
doubts. The doubts arise in the mind. The mind is born of the ego.
The ego rises from the Self. Search the source of the ego and the
Self is revealed. That alone remains. The universe is only expanded
Self. It is not different from the Self.
D.: What is the best way of living?
M.: It differs according as one is a Jnani or ajnani. A Jnani does not
find anything different or separate from the Self. All are in the Self.
It is wrong to imagine that there is the world, that there is a body in
it and that you dwell in the body. If the Truth is known, the universe
and what is beyond it will be found to be only in the Self. The outlook

differs according to the sight of the person. The sight is from the eye.
The eye must be located somewhere. If you are seeing with the gross
eyes you find others gross. If with subtle eyes (i.e., the mind) others
appear subtle. If the eye becomes the Self, the Self being infinite, the
eye is infinite. There is nothing else to see different from the Self.
He thanked Maharshi. He was told that the best way of thanking
is to remain always as the Self.
Talk 107.
Later the Yogi asked: How is the spiritual uplift of the people to be
effected? What are the instructions to be given them?
M.: They differ according to the temperaments of the individuals and
according to the spiritual ripeness of their minds. There cannot be
any instruction en masse.
D.: Why does God permit suffering in the world? Should He not
with His omnipotence do away with it at one stroke and ordain the
universal realisation of God?
M.: Suffering is the way for Realisation of God.
D.: Should He not ordain differently?
M.: It is the way.
D.: Are Yoga, religion, etc., antidotes to suffering?
M.: They help you to overcome suffering.
D.: Why should there be suffering?
M.: Who suffers? What is suffering?
No answer! Finally the Yogi rose up, prayed for Sri Bhagavan’s
blessings for his own work and expressed great regret for his hasty
return. He looked very sincere and devoted and even emotional.
Talk 108.
In continuation of dialogue 105: Uddalaka explained that all proceeds
from sat (as illustrated by deep sleep).
The body takes food. Food requires water. Water requires heat to digest
the food. (Tejo mulamanvichcha) It is sat parasyam devatayam (merged
in the Be-ing). If we are sat sampannah (merged in the Be-ing), how
is it that we do not realise it?

M.: Just as the honey gathered from different flowers forms the bulk
in a honeycomb, and each drop does not indicate wherefrom it has
been collected, so also sat sampannah in deep sleep, death, etc.,
people do not recognise their individualities. They slip into that
state unawares. But when they wake up they regain their original
individual characteristics.
D.: Honey, though collected from different flowers, becomes the bulk
and does not possess individual characteristics. But the individual
parts do not also exist in the drops and they do not return to their
sources. Whereas the individuals after going to deep sleep wake
up individuals as formerly. How is it?
M.: Just as the rivers discharged into the ocean lose their individualities,
still the waters evaporate and return as rain on the hills and through
rivers to the ocean, so also the individuals going to sleep lose
their individualities and yet return as individuals according to their
previous vasanas unawares. Thus, even in death, sat is not lost.
D.: How can that be?
M.: See how a tree, whose branches are cut, grows again. So long as
the life-source is not affected it will grow. Similarly the samskaras
(anamneses) sink into the heart in death: they do not perish. They
will in right time sprout forth from the heart. That is how the jivas
are reborn.
D.: How does the wide universe sprout forth from such subtle
samskaras remaining sunk in the heart?
M.: Just as a big banyan tree sprouts from a tiny seed, so the wide
universe with names and forms sprouts forth from the heart.
D.: If the origin is sat why is it not felt?
M.: The salt in the lump is visible; it is invisible in solution. Still its existence
is known by taste. Similarly sat, though not recognised by the intellect,
can still be realised in a different way, i.e., transcendentally.
D.: How?
M.: Just as a man blindfolded and left by robbers in a jungle enquires
his way home and returns there, so also the ignorant one (blinded
by ignorance) enquires of those not so blinded and seeks his own
source and returns to it.

Then, Gurupadesa - “Vang manasi sampadyate, manah prane,
pranastejasi, tejah parasyam devatayam iti.”
D.: If so, a Jnani or an ajnani dies in the same manner. Why is an
ajnani reborn, whereas a Jnani is not?
M.: Just as an innocent man satyabhisandha is not affected by the test
of touching red hot iron but a thief is affected, so also the sadbrahma
satyabhisandha, i.e., a Jnani, enters into sat consciously and merges,
whereas the other enters unaware and is thrown out unawares also.

Talk 109.
13th December, 1935
Two gentlemen from Ambala (the Punjab) had been here for a few
weeks. Just before taking leave of Sri Bhagavan one of them asked
how he should remove the spiritual drowsiness of his friends or of
other people in general.
M.: Have you removed your own ‘spiritual drowsiness?’ The force
which is set up to remove your own ‘drowsiness’ will also operate
in other centres. There is the will-power with which you can act
on others. But it is on a lower plane and not desirable. Take care
of yourself first.
D.: How to remove my own ‘drowsiness’?
M.: Whose ‘drowsiness’ is it? Enquire. Turn within. Turn all your
enquiries towards search for Self. The force set up within you will
operate on others also.

Talk 110.
14th December, 1935
An American lady asked Bhagavan what his experiences of samadhi
were. When suggested that she should relate her experiences and ask
if they were right, she replied that Sri Bhagavan’s experiences ought to
be correct and should be known, whereas her own were unimportant.
She thus wanted to know if Sri Bhagavan felt his body hot or cold
in samadhi, if he spent the first three and a half years of his stay at
Tiruvannamalai in prayers and so on.

M.: Samadhi transcends mind and speech and cannot be described. For
example, the state of deep slumber cannot be described; samadhi
state can still less be explained.
D.: But I know that I am unconscious in deep sleep.
M.: Consciousness and unconsciousness are only modes of the mind.
Samadhi transcends the mind.
D.: Still you can say what it is like.
M.: You will know only when you are in samadhi.

Talk 111.
16th December, 1935
A Telugu gentleman asked about Brahma bhavana.
M.: Not to think “I am Brahman” or “All is Brahman” is itself
jivanmukti.
He asked about inspired action.
M.: Let activities go on. They do not affect the pure Self.

Talk 112.
17th December, 1935
Mr. P. Brunton, while reading Upadesa Manjari, came across the
statement that the ego, the world and God are all unreal. He desired
to use a different word for God or at least a qualifying adjective, e.g.,
the Creative Force or personal God.
Sri Bhagavan explained that God means SAMASHTI - i.e., all that
is, plus the Be-ing - in the same way as ‘I’ means the individual
plus the Be-ing, and the world means the variety plus Be-ing. The
Be-ing is in all cases real. The all, the variety and the individual is in
each case unreal. So also in the union of the real and the unreal, the
mixing up or the false identification is wrong. It amounts to saying
sad-asadvilakshana, i.e., transcending the real and the unreal - sat
and asat. Reality is that which transcends all concepts, including that
of God. Inasmuch as the name of God is used, it cannot be true. The
Hebrew word Jehovah = (I am) expresses God correctly. Absolute
Be-ing is beyond expression.

The word cannot be replaced nor need it be replaced. The Englishman
casually said that in prehistoric ages there was spirituality but not
high intellect, whereas intellect has now developed. Sri Bhagavan
pointed out that intellect raises the question “whose intellect?” The
answer is, of the Self. So intellect is a tool of the Self. The Self uses
intellect for measuring variety. Intellect is not the Self nor apart from
the Self. The Self alone is eternal. Intellect is only a phenomenon.
People speak of the development of variety as being the development
of intellect. Intellect was always there. Dhata yatha parvam akalpayat
(The Creator created just as before). Consider your own state, day by
day. There is no intellect in dreamless deep sleep. But it is there now.
There is no intellect in a child. It develops with age. How could there
be manifestation of intellect without its seed in the sleep state and in
the child? Why go to history to teach this fundamental fact? The level
of truth of history is only the level of truth of the individual.
Talk 113.
A Telugu gentleman asked about Karma Yoga. Sri Bhagavan said
that the man should act as an actor on the stage. In all actions there is
the sat as the underlying principle. “Remember it and act.” He asked
about the purity of mind - chitta suddhi. Sri Bhagavan said that chitta
suddhi is to engage in one thought only to the exclusion of all others.
It is otherwise called one-pointedness of the mind. The practice of
meditation purifies the mind.

Talk 114.
23rd December, 1935
Baron Von Veltheim - Ostran, an East German Baron, asked, There should
be harmony between knowledge of the Self and knowledge of the world.
They must develop side by side. Is it right? Does Maharshi agree?
M.: Yes.
D.: Beyond the intellect and before wisdom dawns there will be pictures
of the world passing before one’s consciousness. Is it so?
Sri Bhagavan pointed out the parallel passage in Dakshinamurti
stotram to signify that the pictures are like reflections in a mirror;

again from the Upanishad - as in the mirror, so in the world of
manes, as in the water, so in the world of Gandharvas; as shadow
and sunlight in Brahma Loka.
D.: There is spiritual awakening since 1930 all the world over? Does
Maharshi agree?
Maharshi said: “The development is according to your sight.”
The Baron again asked if Maharshi would induce a spiritual trance and
give him a message - which is unspoken but still understandable.
No answer was made.

Talk 115.
25th December, 1935
Mr. M. Frydman: Even without any initial desires there are some
strange experiences for us. Wherefrom do they arise?
M.: The desire may not be there now. Enough if it was there before.
Though forgotten by you now it is bearing fruit in due course. That
is how the Jnani is said to have prarabdha left for him. Of course
it is only according to others’ point of view.
Talk 116.
D.: Jiva is said to be bound by karma. Is it so?
M.: Let karma enjoy its fruits. As long as you are the doer so long
are you the enjoyer.
D.: How to get released from karma.
M.: See whose karma it is. You will find you are not the doer. Then
you will be free. This requires grace of God for which you should
pray to Him, worship Him and meditate on Him.
The karma which takes place without effort, i.e., involuntary action,
is not binding.
Even a Jnani is acting as seen by his bodily movements. There
can be no karma without effort or without intentions (sankalpas).
Therefore there are sankalpas for all. They are of two kinds (1) one,
binding - bandha-hetu and the other (2) mukti-hetu - not binding.
The former must be given up and the latter must be cultivated. There

is no fruit without previous karma; no karma without previous
sankalpa. Even mukti must be the result of effort so long as the
sense of doership persists.
Talk 117.
A Ceylonese: What is the first step for Realisation of Self? Please help
me towards it. There is no use reading books.
Another: This one man’s request is that of us all.
M.: Quite so. If the Self be found in books it would have been already
realised. What wonder can be greater than that we seek the Self in
books? Can it be found there?
Of course books have given readers the sense to ask this question
and to seek the Self.
D.: Books are utterly useless. They may all be burnt. The spoken
word alone is useful. Grace alone is useful.
Others spoke according to their own light, until finally they returned
to the original question, but Sri Bhagavan remained silent.
Talk 118.
Mr. Rangachari, a Telugu Pandit in Voorhees’ College at Vellore, asked
about nishkama karma. There was no reply. After a time Sri Bhagavan
went up the hill and a few followed him, including the pandit. There
was a thorny stick lying on the way which Sri Bhagavan picked up;
he sat down and began leisurely to work at it. The thorns were cut
off, the knots were made smooth, the whole stick was polished with a
rough leaf. The whole operation took about six hours. Everyone was
wondering at the fine appearance of the stick made of a spiky material.
A shepherd boy put in his appearance on the way as the group moved
off. He had lost his stick and was at a loss. Sri Bhagavan immediately
gave the new one in his hand to the boy and passed on.
The pandit said that this was the matter-of-fact answer to his question.
Talk 119.
Again at the same time there were four dogs in the Asramam. Sri
Bhagavan said that those dogs would not accept any food not partaken

by Himself. The pandit put the matter to the test. He spread some
food before them; they would not touch it; then Sri Bhagavan, after
a time, put a small morsel of it into His mouth. Immediately they fell
to and devoured the food.
Talk 120.
Later a man brought two peacocks with their eyes screened. When
let loose in Maharshi’s presence they flew away to a distance. They
were brought back but still they flew away. Sri Bhagavan then said,
“It is no use trying to keep them here. They are not ripe in their minds
as these dogs.” However much they tried to keep the peacocks they
would not remain there even a minute.
Talk 121.
Talks between the Master and two Moslems on a previous occasion.
D.: Has God a form?
M.: Who says so?
D.: Well, if God has no form is it proper to worship idols?
M.: Leave God alone because He is unknown. What about you? Have
you a form?
D.: Yes. I am this and so and so.
M.: So then, you are a man with limbs, about three and a half cubits
high, with beard, etc. Is it so?
D.: Certainly.
M.: Then do you find yourself so in deep sleep?
D.: After waking I perceive that I was asleep. Therefore by inference
I remained thus in deep sleep also.
M.: If you are the body why do they bury the corpse after death? The
body must refuse to be buried.
D.: No, I am the subtle jiva within the gross body.
M.: So you see that you are really formless; but you are at present
identifying yourself with the body. So long as you are formful why
should you not worship the formless God as being formful?
The questioner was baffled and perplexed.

Talk 122.
1st January, 1936
A crowd had gathered here during Christmas.
D.: How to attain Unity Consciousness?
M.: Being Unity Consciousness how to attain it? Your question is its
own answer.
D.: What is Atman (Self), anatman (non-self) and paramatman
(Supreme Self)?
M.: Atman is jivatman (the individual Self) and the rest are plain. The
Self is ever-present (nityasiddha). Each one wants to know the Self.
What kind of help does one require to know oneself? People want
to see the Self as something new. But it is eternal and remains the
same all along. They desire to see it as a blazing light, etc. How
can it be so? It is not light, not darkness (na tejo, na tamah). It
is only as it is. It cannot be defined. The best definition is ‘I am
that I AM.’ The Srutis speak of the Self as being the size of one’s
thumb, the tip of the hair, an electric spark, vast, subtler than the
subtlest, etc. They have no foundation in fact. It is only Being, but
different from the real and the unreal; it is Knowledge, but different
from knowledge and ignorance. How can it be defined at all? It is
simply Being.
Again Sri Bhagavan said that in the whole Thayumanavar
literature, he preferred one stanza which says: “Ego disappearing
another ‘I-I’ spontaneously manifests in full glory,” etc. Again
he cites Skandar Anubhuti: “Not real, nor unreal; not darkness
nor light, it is.”
One man said, that a siddha of Kumbakonam claimed to overcome
the defects in Sri Sankara’s system which deals only with
transcendentalism and not the work-a-day life. One must be able
to exercise super-human powers in ordinary life, that is to say, one
must be a siddha in order to be perfect.
Sri Bhagavan pointed out a stanza in Thayumanavar which
condemns all siddhis. Further he said that Thayumanavar mentions
mouna (silence) in numerous places but defines it in only one verse.

Mouna is said to be that state which spontaneously manifests after
the annihilation of the ego. That state is beyond light and darkness,
but still it is called light since no other proper word could be found
for it.

Talk 123.
3rd January, 1936
Dr. Mohammed Hafiz Syed, a Muslim Professor of Persian and Urdu
in the University of Allahabad, asked: “ What is the purpose of this
external manifestation?”
M.: This manifestation had induced your question.
D.: True. I am covered by maya. How to be free from it?
M.: Who is covered by maya? Who wants to be free?
D.: Master, being asked ‘Who?’, I know that it is ignorant me,
composed of the senses, mind and body. I tried this enquiry ‘Who?’
after reading Paul Brunton’s book. Three or four times I was feeling
elated and the elation lasted sometime and faded away. How to be
established in ‘I’? Please give me the clue and help me.
M.: That which appears anew must also disappear in due course.
D.: Please tell me the method of reaching the eternal Truth.
M.: You are That. Can you ever remain apart from the Self? To be
yourself requires no effort since you are always That.
Talk 124.
Another impatient questioner elaborated long premises and finished
asking why some children die a premature death. He required the
answer not to satisfy the grown-up ones who look on, but the babies
who are the victims.
M.: Let the victims ask. Why do you ask and desire the answer from
the standpoint of the child?
Talk 125.
The Muslim Professor asked: When I am here my mind is satvic; as soon
as I turn my back on this, my mind hankers after so many objects.

M.: Are the objects different from you? There can be no objects
without the subject.
D.: And how shall I know it?
M.: Being That, what do you want to know? Are there two selves for
the one to know the other?
D.: Again, I repeat, sir, how to know the truth of all this and experience
the same?
M.: There is no gaining of anything new. All that is required is to rid
the Self of ignorance. This ignorance is the identification of the
Self with the non-Self.
D.: Yes. Still I do not understand. I must have your help. Everyone
here is waiting on you for your Grace. You yourself must have
sought originally the help of a Guru or of God. Extend that Grace
to others now and save me.
Before I came here I desired to see you very much. But somehow
I could not find an opportunity to do so. In Bangalore I made up
my mind to return to my place. I met Mr. Frydman and others
who sent me here. You have dragged me here. My case is like Paul
Brunton’s in Bombay, when he was dragged here having cancelled
his passage home.
I hesitated at first on arrival. I wondered if I would be permitted to
approach you and converse with you. My doubts were soon set at
rest. I find that all are equal here. You have established an equality
among all. I dined with you and others. If I should say so to my
people in U.P., they would not believe it. The Brahmins would not
drink water with me, nor chew pan with me. But here you have
taken me and others like me in your fold. Though Gandhi is striving
hard he cannot bring about such a state of affairs in the country. I
am very happy in your presence.
I regard you as God. I consider Sri Krishna to be true God because
He has said, “Whomsoever one may worship, the worshipper
worships me only and I save him.” Whereas all others have said,
“Salvation is through me (meaning himself) only,” Krishna alone
is so broad-minded and has spoken like God. You observe the same
kind of equality.

Talk 126.
4th January, 1936
Dr. Syed again asked: “Should anyone desirous of spiritual progress
take to action or renunciation (pravritti-marga or nivritti-marga)?”
M.: Do you go out of the Self? What is meant by giving up?
An American Engineer asked about sat-sanga (association with sages).
M.: Sat is within us.
D.: In the book “Who am I?” you have said the Heart is the seat of
the mind. Is it so?
M.: The mind is Atman.
D.: Is it Atman itself or its projection?
M.: The same.
D.: The Westerners look on the mind as the highest principle, whereas
the Easterners think the contrary - why?
M.: Where psychology ends, there philosophy begins. This is
experience; the mind is born; we see it; even without the mind we
exist. There is everyone’s experience to prove it.
D.: In deep sleep I do not seem to exist.
M.: You say so when awake. It is the mind which speaks now. You
exist in deep sleep beyond mind.
D.: Western philosophy admits the Higher Self as influencing the mind.
Talk 127.
The American Engineer asked: “Does distance have any effect upon
Grace?”
M.: Time and space are within us. You are always in your Self. How
do time and space affect it?
D.: In radio those who are nearer hear sooner. You are Hindu, we are
American. Does it make any difference?
M.: No.
D.: Even thoughts are read by others.
M.: That shows that all are one.

Talk 128.
5th January, 1936
There were some French ladies and gentlemen and American as visitors
to the Asramam. They asked Sri Bhagavan several questions. Among
them, one was: “What is the message of the East to the West?”
M.: All go to the same goal.
To another question Sri Bhagavan said: “How do you say ‘I am’?
Do you take a light to find yourself? Or did you come to know it
on reading books? How?”
The questioner said: “By experience.”
M.: Yes. Experience is the word. Knowledge implies subject and
object. But experience is non-terminal, eternal.

Talk 129.
6th January, 1936
An elderly gentleman, formerly a co-worker with B. V. Narasimha Swami
and author of some Visishtadvaita work, visited the place for the first
time. He asked about rebirths, if it is possible for the linga sarira (subtle
body) to get dissolved and be reborn in two years after death.
M.: Yes. Surely. Not only can one be reborn, one may be twenty or forty
or even seventy years old in the new body though only two years after
death. Sri Bhagavan cited Lila’s story from Yoga Vasishta.
Sreyo hi jnanam abhyasat jnanat dhyanam,
dhyanat karmaphala tyagah.
Here jnana stands for knowledge without practice; abhyasa stands
for practice without knowledge; dhyana stands for practice with
knowledge.
“Knowledge without practice accompanying it is superior to
practice without knowledge. Practice with knowledge is superior
to knowledge without practice accompanying it. Karmaphala
tyagah Nishkama karma as of a Jnani - action without desire - is
superior to knowledge with practice.”

D.: What is the difference between yoga and surrender?
M.: Surrender is Bhakti Yoga. To reach the source of the ‘I-thought’ is
the destruction of the ego, is the attainment of the goal, is prapatti
(surrender), jnana, etc.
Talk 130.
Lakshman Brahmachari from Sri Ramakrishna Mission asked:
Enquiry of ‘Who am I?’ or of the ‘I-thought’ being itself a thought,
how can it be destroyed in the process?
M.: When Sita was asked who was her husband among the rishis
(Rama himself being present there as a rishi) in the forest by the
wives of the rishis, she denied each one as he was pointed out to
her, but simply hung down her head when Rama was pointed out.
Her silence was eloquent.
Similarly, the Vedas also are eloquent in ‘neti’ - ‘neti’ (not this - not
this) and then remain silent. Their silence is the Real State. This is
the meaning of exposition by silence. When the source of the ‘I-thought’
is reached it vanishes and what remains over is the Self.
D.: Patanjali Yoga Sutras speak of identification.
M.: Identification with the Supreme is only the other name for the
destruction of the ego.
Talk 131.
Mr. Subba Rao asked: What is mukhya prana (the chief prana)?
M.: It is that from which the ego and the prana rise. It is sometimes
called Kundalini. Consciousness is not born at any time, it remains
eternal. But ego is born; so also the other thoughts. Associated with
the absolute consciousness they shine forth; not otherwise.
D.: What is moksha (liberation)?
M.: Moksha is to know that you were not born. “Be still and know
that I am God.”
To be still is not to think. Know, and not think, is the word.
D.: There are said to be six organs of different colours in the chest,
of which the heart is said to be two finger-breadths to the right of

the middle line. But the Heart is also formless. Should we then
imagine it to have a shape and meditate on it?
M.: No. Only the quest “Who am I?” is necessary. What remains all
through deep sleep and waking is the same. But in waking there
is unhappiness and the effort to remove it. Asked who wakes up
from sleep you say ‘I’. Now you are told to hold fast to this ‘I’.
If it is done the eternal Being will reveal Itself. Investigation
of ‘I’ is the point and not meditation on the heart-centre. There
is nothing like within or without. Both mean either the same
thing or nothing.
Of course there is also the practice of meditation on the heart-centre.
It is only a practice and not investigation. Only the one who
meditates on the heart can remain aware when the mind ceases to
be active and remains still; whereas those who meditate on other
centres cannot be so aware but infer that the mind was still only
after it becomes again active.
Talk 132.
An educated man asked: Is there an Absolute Being? What is its
relation to the relative existence?
M.: Are they different from each other? All the questions arise
only in the mind. The mind arises with waking and subsides
in deep sleep. As long as there is a mind, so long will there be
such questions and doubts.
D.: There must be stage after stage of progress for gaining the
Absolute. Are there grades of Reality?
M.: There are no grades of Reality. There are grades of experience for
the jiva and not of Reality. If anything can be gained anew, it could
also be lost, whereas the Absolute is central - here and now.
D.: If so, how do I remain ignorant of it (avarana)?
M.: For whom is this ignorance (veiling)? Does the Absolute tell you
that it is veiled? It is the jiva who says that something veils the
Absolute. Find out for whom this ignorance is.
D.: Why is there imperfection in Perfection? That is, how did the
Absolute become relative?

M.: For whom is this relativity? For whom is this imperfection? The
Absolute is not imperfect and cannot ask. The insentient cannot
ask the question. Between the two something has risen up which
raises these questions and which feels this doubt. Who is it? Is it
the one who has now arisen? Or is it the one who is eternal?
Being perfect, why do you feel yourself imperfect? Such is the
teaching of all the religions. Whatever may be the experiences, the
experiencer is one and the same.
‘I’ is purna - perfection. There is no diversity in sleep. That indicates
perfection.
D.: Being perfect, why do I not feel it?
M.: Nor is imperfection felt in deep sleep. The ‘I’ in sleep being
perfect, why does the waking ‘I’ feel imperfect? Because the one
who feels imperfect is a spurious offshoot, a differentiation from
the Infinite - a segregation from God.
D.: I am the same in all the three states. Did this ego submerge me
or did I entangle myself into it?
M.: Did anything come up without you?
D.: I am always the same.
M.: Because you see it, this appears to have come up. Did you feel
this difficulty in deep sleep? What is new now?
D.: The senses and the mind.
M.: Who says this? Is it the sleeper? If so he should have raised the
question in deep sleep also. The sleeper has been lost hold of, some
spurious offshoot has differentiated himself and speaks now.
Can anything new appear without that which is eternal and
perfect? This kind of dispute is itself eternal. Do not engage
in it. Turn inward and put an end to all this. There will be no
finality in disputations.
D.: Show me that Grace which puts an end to all this trouble. I have
not come here to argue. I want only to learn.
M.: Learn first what you are. This requires no sastras, no scholarship.
This is simple experience. The state of being is now and here all
along. You have lost hold of yourself and are asking others for

guidance. The purpose of philosophy is to turn you inward. “If
you know your Self, no evil can come to you. Since you asked me
I have taught you.”
The ego comes up only holding you (the Self). Hold yourself and
the ego will vanish. Until then the sage will be saying, “There is.”
- The ignorant will be asking “Where?”
D.: The crux of the problem lies in “Know Thyself.”
M.: Yes. Quite so.
Talk 133.
There are two schools in Advaita: (1) Drishti srishti (simultaneous
creation) and (2) Srishti drishti (gradual creation).
There is the Tantric Advaita which admits three fundamentals jagat,
jiva, Isvara - world, soul, God. These three are also real. But the
reality does not end with them. It extends beyond. That is the Tantric
Advaita. The Reality is limitless. The three fundamentals do not exist
apart from the Absolute Reality. All agree that Reality is all-pervading;
thus Isvara pervades the jiva; therefore the jiva has eternal being. His
knowledge is not limited. Limited knowledge is only imagined by
him. In truth, his is infinite knowledge. Its limit is Silence. This truth
was revealed by Dakshinamurti. For those who still perceive these
three fundamentals they are said to be realities. They are concomitant
with the ego.
True, the images of gods are described in great detail. Such
description points only to the final Reality. Otherwise why is the
special significance of each detail also given? Think. The image is
only a symbol. Only that which lies beyond name and form is Reality.
Saiva Siddhanta and Vedanta have the common aim of the same Truth.
Otherwise how could Sri Sankaracharya, the greatest exponent of
Advaita, sing praises of gods? Obviously he did so knowingly.
The questioner earnestly explained that his faith in Saiva Siddhanta,
Vedanta, etc., was shaken after reading Bahaic literature. “Please
save me,” he said.
M.: Know the Self which is here and now; you will be steady and
not waver.

D.: The Bahaists read others’ minds.
M.: Yes. That is possible. Your thoughts were read by another. There
must be one to know your mind. That is the Truth always present
which is to be realised. Truth does not waver.
D.: Show me Grace.
M.: Grace always is, and is not given. Why do you consider the pros and
cons of Bahaullah or others being incarnations or otherwise? Know
Thyself. Regard everything as Truth. Regard him also as the Truth. Can
he exist besides Truth? Your beliefs may change but not Truth.
D.: Show me the truth of Siddhanta, etc.
M.: Follow their instructions and then if you have doubts you may
ask. Adherence to those instructions will take you only to mouna.
Differences are perceived in external objects only. If you follow
their instructions all differences will be lost. No one but the son
of a king can be called a prince; so also only That which is perfect
is called Perfection.
One should not be content with mere discipleship, initiation,
ceremony of surrender, etc.; these are external phenomena. Never
forget the Truth underlying all phenomena.
D.: What is the significance of the Silence of Dakshinamurti?
M.: Many are the explanations given by scholars and sages. Have it
any way you please.

Talk 134.
14th January, 1936
A question about the Heart was raised.
Sri Bhagavan said that one should seek the Self and realise it. The
Heart will play its part automatically. The seat of realisation is the
Heart. It cannot be said to be either in or out.
D.: Did Bhagavan feel the Heart as the point of Realisation in his
first or early experience?
M.: I began to use the word after seeing literature on the subject. I
correlated it with my experience.

Talk 135.
15th January, 1936
Three European ladies from the Theosophical Conference came here
and asked: “Is the whole scheme, the Plan, really good? Or is it in the
nature of an error, a mistake of which we have to make the best?”
M.: The Plan is indeed good. The error is on our part. When we correct
it in ourselves the whole scheme becomes all right.
D.: Have you any formula to teach us how to bring it about through
a remembrance of what we do during sleep?
M.: No formula is needed. Everyone has the experience that he slept
happily and knew nothing then. Nothing else was experienced.
D.: The answer does not satisfy me. We wander in the astral plane in
our sleep but we do not remember it.
M.: The astral plane is concerned with dreams, not with deep sleep.
D.: What do you consider to be the cause of world suffering? And how
can we help to change it, (a) as individuals? or (b) collectively?
M.: Realise the Real Self. It is all that is necessary.
D.: Can we hasten our illumination for greater service? and how?
M.: As we are not able to help ourselves, so we have to surrender
ourselves to the Supreme completely. Then He will take care of
us as well as the world.
D.: What do you consider the goal?
M.: Self-Realisation.
D.: Is there any way to meet the appointed Guru for each?
M.: Intense meditation brings it about.
Talk 136.
Dr. G. H. Mees, a young Dutchman, was here for a few days. He
asked Sri Bhagavan: “I have an impression that in deep sleep I have
something akin to samadhi. Is it so?”
M.: It is the waking ‘I’ that asks the questions - not the ‘I’ in sleep. If
you attain the state of wakeful sleep which is the same as samadhi,
while still awake, doubts will not arise.

Samadhi is one’s natural state. It is the under-current in all the
three states. This - that is, ‘I’ - is not in those states, but these states
are in It. If we get samadhi in our waking state that will persist
in deep sleep also. The distinction between consciousness and
unconsciousness belongs to the realm of mind, which is transcended
by the state of the Real Self.
D.: Is the Buddhist view, that there is no continuous entity answering to
the ideas of the individual soul, correct or not? Is this consistent with
the Hindu notion of a reincarnating ego? Is the soul a continuous
entity which reincarnates again and again, according to the Hindu
doctrine, or is it a mere mass of mental tendencies - samskaras?
M.: The Real Self is continuous and unaffected. The reincarnating
ego belongs to the lower plane, namely, thought. It is transcended
by Self-Realisation.
Reincarnations are due to a spurious offshoot. Therefore it is denied
by the Buddhists. The present state is due to a mixing up of the
chit (sentient) with jada (insentient).
Talk 137.
Lakshman Brahmachari of Sri Ramakrishna Mission asked: “Can one
imagine oneself as witness of the thoughts?”
M.: It is not the natural state. It is only an idea (bhavana) - an aid to
stilling the mind. The Self is ever the witness, whether so imagined
or not. There is no need to so imagine except for that purpose. But
it is best to remain as one’s Self.
Talk 138.
The Financial Secretary of Mysore asked: “Is Paul Brunton’s Secret
Path useful for Indians as well?”
M.: Yes - for all.
D.: The body, the senses, etc. are not ‘I’. This is common amongst
us. But how to practise it?
M.: By the threefold method mentioned therein.
D.: Is breath-control necessary for enquiry?
M.: Not quite.

D.: “There is a blankness intervening,” it is said in the book.
M.: Yes. Do not stop there. See for whom the blankness appears.
D.: For devotees there is no blankness, it is said.
M.: Even there, there is the latent state, laya; the mind wakes up after
some time.
D.: What is the experience of samadhi?
M.: It is as it is. For onlookers it may seem to be a swoon. Even to
the practiser it may appear so in the early experiences. After a few
repeated experiences it will be all right.
D.: Do they soothe nadis or do they excite them by such experiences?
M.: They are excited at first. By continued experience it becomes
common and the man is no longer excited.
D.: Proceeding on safe lines there should be no unpleasantness.
Excitement is uncongenial to smooth being and working.
M.: A wandering mind is on the wrong way; only a devotional mind
is on the right way.

Talk 139.
19th January, 1936
Mr. Ellappa Chettiar, a Member of the Legislative Council, from
Salem, asked: “Is it enough to introvert the mind or should we meditate
on ‘I am Brahman’?”
M.: To introvert the mind is the prime thing. The Buddhists consider the
flow of ‘I’ thought to be Liberation; whereas we say that such flow
proceeds from its underlying substratum - the only - Reality.
Why should one be meditating ‘I am Brahman’? Only the
annihilation of ‘I’ is Liberation. But it can be gained only by
keeping the ‘I-I’ always in view. So the need for the investigation
of the ‘I’ thought. If the ‘I’ is not let go, no blank can result to the
seeker. Otherwise meditation will end in sleep.
There is only one ‘I’ all along, but what arises up from time to time
is the mistaken ‘I-thought’; whereas the intuitive ‘I’ always remains
Self-shining, i.e., even before it becomes manifest.

The birth of the gross body does not amount to one’s own birth, on
the other hand, the birth of the ego is one’s own birth.
For liberation, nothing new remains to be gained. It is the original
state and continues unchanged too.
Talk 140.
D.: What is reality?
M.: Reality must be always real. It is not with forms and names. That
which underlies these is the Reality. It underlies limitations, being
itself limitless. It is not bound. It underlies unrealities, itself being
real. Reality is that which is. It is as it is. It transcends speech,
beyond the expressions, e.g., existence, non-existence, etc.
Talk 141.
The same gentleman later, after quoting a verse from Kaivalya, asked:
“Can jnana be lost after being once attained?”
M.: Jnana, once revealed, takes time to steady itself. The Self is certainly
within the direct experience of everyone, but not as one imagines
it to be. It is only as it is. This Experience is samadhi. Just as fire
remains without scorching against incantations or other devices but
scorches otherwise, so also the Self remains veiled by vasanas and
reveals itself when there are no vasanas. Owing to the fluctuation
of the vasanas, jnana takes time to steady itself. Unsteady jnana is
not enough to check rebirths. Jnana cannot remain unshaken side by
side with vasanas. True, that in the proximity of a great master, the
vasanas will cease to be active, the mind becomes still and samadhi
results, similar to fire not scorching because of other devices. Thus
the disciple gains true knowledge and right experience in the presence
of the master. To remain unshaken in it further efforts are necessary.
He will know it to be his real Being and thus be liberated even while
alive. Samadhi with closed eyes is certainly good, but one must go
further until it is realised that actionlessness and action are not hostile
to each other. Fear of loss of samadhi while one is active is the sign
of ignorance. Samadhi must be the natural life of everyone.
There is a state beyond our efforts or effortlessness. Until it is
realised effort is necessary. After tasting such Bliss, even once

one will repeatedly try to regain it. Having once experienced the
Bliss of Peace no one would like to be out of it or engaged himself
otherwise. It is as difficult for a Jnani to engage in thoughts as it
is for an ajnani to be free from thought.
The common man says that he does not know himself; he thinks
many thoughts and cannot remain without thinking.
Any kind of activity does not affect a Jnani; his mind remains ever
in eternal Peace.

Talk 142.
20th January, 1936
Mr. Prakasa Rao from Bezwada: Does not illusion become inoperative
even before identity with Brahman results (Brahmakaravritti)? Or
does it persist even afterwards?
M.: Illusion will not persist after vasanas are annihilated. In the
interval between the knowledge of the identity and annihilation
of vasanas, there will be illusion.
D.: How can the world influence a man even after identity with Brahman?
M.: First do it and see. You can then raise this question, if necessary.
D.: Can we know it in the same way as we know our identity?
M.: Are you different from the mind? How do you expect it to be
known?
D.: Can the full scope of the Chitta (Chittavilasa) be known?
M.: Oh! Is this the identity of Brahman?
Ignorance vanishing, the residue reveals itself. It is experience, not
in the category of knowledge.

Talk 143.
23rd January, 1936
Mr. P. Brunton asked Sri Bhagavan if the Hill here is hollow.
M.: The puranas say so. When it is said that the Heart is a cavity,
penetration into it proves it to be an expanse of light. Similarly the
Hill is one of light. The caves, etc., are covered up by the Light.

D.: Are there caves inside?
M.: In visions I have seen caves, cities with streets, etc., and a whole
world in it.
D.: Are there Siddhas too in it?
M.: All the Siddhas are reputed to be there.
D.: Are there only Siddhas or others also?
M.: Just like this world.
D.: Siddhas are said to be in the Himalayas.
M.: Kailas is on the Himalayas: it is the abode of Siva. Whereas this
Hill is Siva Himself. All the paraphernalia of His abode must also
be where He Himself is.
D.: Does Bhagavan believe that the Hill is hollow, etc.?
M.: Everything depends on the viewpoint of the individual. You
yourself have seen hermitages, etc., on this Hill in a vision. You
have described such in your book.
D.: Yes. It was on the surface of the Hill. The vision was within me.
M.: That is exactly so. Everything is within one’s Self. To see the
world, there must be a spectator. There could be no world without
the Self. The Self is all-comprising. In fact Self is all. There is
nothing besides the Self.
D.: What is the mystery of this Hill?
M.: Just as you have said in Secret Egypt, “The mystery of the pyramid
is the mystery of the Self,” so also the mystery of this Hill is the
mystery of the Self.
Maj. Chadwick: I do not know if the Self is different from the ego.
M.: How were you in your deep sleep?
D.: I do not know.
M.: Who does not know? Is it not the waking Self? Do you deny your
existence in your deep sleep?
D.: I was and I am; but I do not know who was in deep sleep.
M.: Exactly. The man awake says that he did not know anything in
the state of sleep. Now he sees the objects and knows that he is
there; whereas in deep sleep there were no objects, no spectator, etc.

The same one who is now speaking was in deep sleep also. What is
the difference between these two states? There are objects and play
of senses now which were not in sleep. A new entity, the ego, has
risen up in the meantime, it plays through the senses, sees the objects,
confounds itself with the body and says that the Self is the ego. In
reality, what was in deep sleep continues to exist now too. The Self
is changeless. It is the ego that has come between. That which rises
and sets is the ego; that which remains changeless is the Self.
Talk 144.
Mr. Prakasa Rao: What is the root-cause of maya?
M.: What is maya?
D.: Maya is wrong knowledge, illusion.
M.: For whom is the illusion? There must be one to be deluded.
Illusion is ignorance. The ignorant Self sees the objects according
to you. When the objects are not themselves present how can maya
exist? Maya is ya ma (maya is what is not). What remains over is
the true Self. If you say that you see the objects, or if you say that
you do not know the Real Unity, then are there two selves, one the
knower and the other the knowable object. No one will admit of two
selves in himself. The awakened man says that he himself was in
deep slumber but not aware. He does not say that the sleeper was
different from the present one. There is only one Self. That Self is
always aware. It is changeless. There is nothing but the Self.
D.: What is the astral body?
M.: Do you not have a body in your dream? Is it not different from
the recumbent body on the bed?
D.: Do we survive after death? Does the astral body outlive physical
death?
M.: Just as in dreams you wake up after several novel experiences, so
also after physical death another body is found and so on.
D.: They say that the astral body lives for forty years after death.
M.: In the present body you say the dream body is astral. Did you say
so in the dream body? What is astral now would appear real then,
the present body itself is astral according to that viewpoint. What

is the difference between one astral body and another? There is no
difference between the two.
Mr. P. Brunton: There are degrees of reality.
M.: To say the dream body is unreal now, and to say that this body
was unreal in the dream, does not denote degrees of reality. In deep
sleep there is no experience of the body at all. There is always only
one and that is the Self.
Talk 145.
Mr. P. Brunton: Why do religions speak of Gods, heaven, hell, etc.?
M.: Only to make the people realise that they are on a par with this
world and that the Self alone is real. The religions are according to
the view-point of the seeker. Take the Bhagavad Gita for instance:
When Arjuna said that he would not fight against his own relatives,
his elders, etc., in order to kill them and gain the kingdom, Sri
Krishna said, “Not that these, you or I, were not before, are not
now, nor will not be hereafter. Nothing was born, nothing was dead,
nor will it not be so hereafter” and so on. Later as he developed the
theme and declared that He had given the same instruction to the
Sun, through him to Ikshvaku, etc. Arjuna raised the doubt, “How
could it be? You were born a few years ago. They lived ages ago.”
Then Sri Krishna understanding Arjuna’s standpoint, said: “Yes.
There have been so many incarnations of myself and yourself, I
know them all but you do not know.”
Such statements appear contradictory, but still they are correct
according to the viewpoint of the questioner. The Christ also
declared that He was even before Abraham.
D.: What is the purpose of such descriptions in religions?
M.: Only to establish the Reality of the Self.
D.: Bhagavan always speaks from the highest standpoint.
Sri Bhagavan (with a smile): People would not understand the simple
and bare truth - the truth of their every day, ever-present and eternal
experience. That Truth is that of the Self. Is there anyone not
aware of the Self? They would not even like to hear it (the Self),
whereas they are eager to know what lies beyond - heaven, hell,

reincarnation. Because they love mystery and not the bare truth,
religions pamper them - only to bring them round to the Self.
Wandering hither and thither you must return to the Self only. Then,
why not abide in the Self even here and now?
The other worlds require the Self as a spectator or speculator. Their
reality is only of the same degrees as that of the spectator or thinker.
They cannot exist without the spectator, etc. Therefore they are not
different from the Self. Even the ignorant man sees only the Self
when he sees objects. But he is confused and identifies the Self
with the object, i.e., the body and with the senses and plays in the
world. Subject and object - all merge in the Self. There is no seer
nor objects seen. The seer and the seen are the Self. There are not
many selves either. All are only one Self.

Talk 146.
26th January, 1936
In reply to Miss Leena Sarabhai, a cultured Indian lady of high rank,
Sri Bhagavan said: The state of equanimity is the state of bliss. The
declaration in the Vedas ‘I am This or That’, is only an aid to gain
equanimity of mind.
D.: So, it is wrong to begin with a goal: is it?
M.: If there be a goal to be reached it cannot be permanent. The goal
must already be there. We seek to reach the goal with the ego, but
the goal exists before the ego. What is in the goal is even prior to
our birth, i.e., to the birth of the ego. Because we exist the ego
appears to exist too.
If we look on the Self as the ego then we become the ego, if as the
mind we become the mind, if as the body we become the body.
It is the thought which builds up sheaths in so many ways. The
shadow on the water is found to be shaking. Can anyone stop the
shaking of the shadow? If it should cease to shake you would not
notice the water but only the light. Similarly to take no notice of
the ego and its activities, but see only the light behind. The ego is
the I-thought. The true ‘I’ is the Self.
D.: It is one step to realisation.

M.: Realisation is already there. The state free from thoughts is the
only real state. There is no such action as Realisation. Is there
anyone who is not realising the Self? Does anyone deny his own
existence? Speaking of realisation, it implies two selves - the one
to realise, the other to be realised. What is not already realised, is
sought to be realised. Once we admit our existence, how is it that
we do not know our Self?
D.: Because of the thoughts - the mind.
M.: Quite so. It is the mind that stands between and veils our
happiness. How do we know that we exist? If you say because
of the world around us, then how do you know that you existed
in deep sleep?
D.: How to get rid of the mind?
M.: Is it the mind that wants to kill itself? The mind cannot kill itself.
So your business is to find the real nature of the mind. Then you
will know that there is no mind. When the Self is sought, the mind is
nowhere. Abiding in the Self, one need not worry about the mind.
D.: How to get rid of fear?
M.: What is fear? It is only a thought. If there is anything besides
the Self there is reason to fear. Who sees the second (anything
external)? First the ego arises and sees objects as external. If the
ego does not rise, the Self alone exists and there is no second
(nothing external). For anything external to oneself implies the
seer within. Seeking it there will arise no doubt, no fear - not
only fear, all other thoughts centred round the ego will disappear
along with it.
D.: This method seems to be quicker than the usual one of cultivating
qualities alleged necessary for salvation (sadhana chatushtaya)?
M.: Yes. All bad qualities centre round the ego. When the ego is gone
Realisation results by itself. There are neither good nor bad qualities
in the Self. The Self is free from all qualities. Qualities pertain to
the mind only. It is beyond quality. If there is unity, there will also
be duality. The numeral one gives rise to other numbers. The truth
is neither one nor two. IT is as it is.
D.: The difficulty is to be in the thought-free state.

M.: Leave the thought-free state to itself. Do not think of it as pertaining to
you. Just as when you walk, you involuntarily take steps, so too in your
actions; but the thought-free state is not affected by your actions.
D.: What is it that is discriminative in action?
M.: Discrimination will be automatic, intuitive.
D.: So Intuition alone matters; Intuition develops also.
M.: Those who have discovered great Truths have done so in the still
depths of the Self.
The ego is like one’s shadow thrown on the ground. If one attempts
to bury it, it will be foolish. The Self is only one. If limited it is the
ego. If unlimited it is Infinite and is the Reality.
The bubbles are different from one another and numerous, but the
ocean is only one. Similarly the egos are many, whereas the Self
is one and only one.
When told that you are not the ego, realise the Reality. Why do you
still identify yourself with the ego? It is like saying, “Don’t think
of the monkey while taking medicine” - it is impossible. Similarly
it happens with common folk. When the Reality is mentioned why
do you continue to meditate Sivoham or Aham Brahmasmi? The
significance must be traced and understood. It is not enough to
repeat the bare words or think of them.
Reality is simply the loss of the ego. Destroy the ego by seeking its
identity. Because the ego is no entity it will automatically vanish
and Reality will shine forth by itself. This is the direct method.
Whereas all other methods are done, only retaining the ego. In those
paths there arise so many doubts and the eternal question remains
to be tackled finally. But in this method the final question is the
only one and it is raised from the very beginning. No sadhanas are
necessary for engaging in this quest.
There is no greater mystery than this - viz., ourselves being the
Reality we seek to gain Reality. We think that there is something
hiding our Reality and that it must be destroyed before the Reality
is gained. It is ridiculous. A day will dawn when you will yourself
laugh at your past efforts. That which will be on the day you laugh
is also here and now.

D.: So it is a great game of pretending?
M.: Yes.
In Yoga Vasishtha it is said, “What is Real is hidden from us, but what
is false, is revealed as true.” We are actually experiencing the Reality
only; still, we do not know it. Is it not a wonder of wonders?
The quest “Who am I?” is the axe with which to cut off the ego.
Talk 147.
In answer to a Canarese Sanyasi, Sri Bhagavan said: There are
different grades of mind. Realisation is of Perfection. It cannot be
comprehended by the mind. Sarvajnatva (the state of all-knowing) is
to be sarvam (the all); ‘the all’ pertains only to the mind. The known
and unknown together form ‘the all’. After transcending the mind you
remain as the Self. The present knowledge is only of limitation. That
Knowledge is unlimited. Being so it cannot be comprehended by this
knowledge. Cease to be a knower, then there is perfection.

Talk 148.
27th January, 1936
A Gujerati gentleman said that he was concentrating on sound - nada
- and desired to know if the method was right.
M.: Meditation on nada is one of the several approved methods.
The adherents claim a very special virtue for the method.
According to them it is the easiest and the most direct method.
Just as a child is lulled to sleep by lullabies, so nada soothes
one to the state of samadhi; again just as a king sends his
state musicians to welcome his son on his return from a long
journey, so also nada takes the devotee into the Lord’s Abode
in a pleasing manner. Nada helps concentration. After it is felt
the practice should not be made an end in itself. Nada is not the
objective; the subject should firmly be held; otherwise a blank
will result. Though the subject is there even in the blank he
would not be aware of the cessation of nada of different kinds.
In order to be aware even in that blank one must remember his
own self. Nada upasana (meditation on sound) is good; it is

better if associated with investigation (vichara). In that case the
nada is made up of chinmaya and also tanmaya (of Knowledge
and of Self). Nada helps concentration.

Talk 149.
28th January, 1936
In reply to a sadhu who asked if bhakti consisted in forgetting the
body, etc. Sri Bhagavan said:
“What do you care for the body? Practise bhakti and don’t worry
about what happens to the body.”
Talk 150.
Mrs. and Mr. Kelly, an elderly couple from America, and others of their
company desired to know what they should do to gain concentration in
face of discomforts of sitting and the sting of mosquitoes, etc.
M.: The discomforts will not worry you if your concentration is right.
Do not mind the discomforts. Keep your mind steady in meditation.
If you have not the strength and endurance to bear mosquito stings
how do you hope to gain realisation of the Self? Realisation must
be amidst all the turmoils of life. If you make yourself comfortable
and go to bed you fall asleep. Face the troubles but keep yourself
steady in meditation.

Talk 151.
31st January, 1936
The American gentleman is a little hard of hearing. Being accustomed
to be self-reliant from his youth he naturally feels worried on account
of his hearing becoming defective.
M.: You were not self-reliant; you were ego-reliant. It is good that
ego-reliance is banished and that you become truly Self-reliant.
Again Bhagavan said:
“There is no cause for worry. Subjugation of senses is a necessary
preliminary for Self-Realisation. One sense is subdued for you by
God Himself. So much the better.”

The questioner said that he appreciated the humour, but that still
his self-respect suffered.
M.: The Self is only one. Do you feel hurt if you blame yourself or scorn
yourself for your errors? If you hold the Self there is no second person
to scorn you. When you see the world you have lost hold of the Self.
On the contrary, hold the Self and the world will not appear.

Talk 152.
1st February, 1936
Mrs. Kelly desired to know how she should best learn to meditate.

Sri Bhagavan asked if she had made japa (rolling beads as Roman
Catholics do). She said: “No”.
M.: Have you thought of God, His qualities, etc.?
D.: I have read, talked, etc. about such themes.
M.: Well, if the same be revolved in the mind without open expression
through the senses it is meditation.
D.: I mean meditation as signified in The Secret Path and Who am I?
M.: Long for it intensely so that the mind melts in devotion. After the
camphor burns away no residue is left. The mind is the camphor;
when it has resolved itself into the Self without leaving even the
slightest trace behind, it is Realisation of the Self.

Talk 153.
4th February, 1936
Some Peshawaris, among them a Judicial Commissioner and a young
man well-read and earnest, with a strong belief in the existence of
Paramatman (Supreme Self) as different from the Jivatman (individual
self), raised some questions.
Sri Bhagavan clinched his various doubts by this one statement:
Remove the upadhis (adjuncts), jiva and parama, from the Atman
and say if you still find the difference. If later these doubts still persist
ask yourself, “Who is the doubter? Who is the thinker?” Find him.
These doubts will vanish.

Talk 154.
5th February, 1936
The next day he asked about pranayama.
M.: Pranayama according to jnana is:
“Na aham” I am not this = out-breathing
“Koham”
Who am I? = in-breathing
“Soham”
I am He = Retention of breath
This is vichara. This vichara brings about the desired result.
For one not so advanced as to engage in it, some meditation brings
about suspension of breath and the mind ceases to be restless.
Control of mind spontaneously effects control of breath; rather
kevala kumbhaka (spontaneous retention of breath, without
attention to inhalation or exhalation) results.
For one unable to do this also, regulation of breath is prescribed
for making the mind quiescent. Quiescence lasts only so long as
the breath is controlled. So it is transient. The goal is clearly not
pranayama. It extends on to pratyahara, dharana, dhyana and
samadhi. Those stages deal with the control of mind. Such control
becomes easier for the man who had earlier practised pranayama.
Pranayama leads him to the higher stages involving control of
mind. Therefore control of mind is the aim of yoga also.
A more advanced man will naturally go direct to control of mind without
wasting his time in practising control of breath. A simple development of
pranayama alone may confer siddhis which so many hanker for.
When asked if there are any food restrictions, Sri Bhagavan said: “Mita
hita bhuk” - agreeable food in moderate quantity. When asked about
the efficacy of bhakti, Sri Bhagavan said: So long as there is vibhakti,
there must be bhakti. So long as there is viyoga, there must be yoga.
So long as there is duality, there must be God and devotee. Similarly
also in vichara. So long as there is vichara, there is duality too. But
merging into the Source there is unity only. So it is with bhakti too.
Realising the God of devotion, there will be unity only. God too is thought
of in and by the Self. So God is identical with the Self. If one is told to have

bhakti for God and he does so straightaway, it is all right. But there is
another kind of man who turns round and says: “There are two, I and
God. Before knowing the far-off God, let me know the more immediate
and intimate ‘I’.” For him the vichara-marga has to be taught. There
is in fact no difference between bhakti and vichara.
Talk 155.
The same man again asked about the nature of samadhi and the means
to get samadhi.
M.: When the one who asks the nature of samadhi and the method of
getting into it vanishes, samadhi will result.
Maj. Chadwick: It is said that one look of a Mahatma is enough; that
idols, pilgrimages, etc. are not so effective. I have been here for
three months, but I do not know how I have been benefited by the
look of Maharshi.
M.: The look has a purifying effect. Purification cannot be visualised.
Just as a piece of coal takes long to be ignited, a piece of charcoal takes
a short time, and a mass of gunpowder is instantaneously ignited, so
it is with grades of men coming in contact with Mahatmas.
Mr. Cohen: I get into meditation and reach a point which may be called
peace and a contemplative mood. What should be the next step?
M.: Peace is Self-Realisation. Peace need not be disturbed. One should
aim at Peace only.
D.: But I do not have the satisfaction.
M.: Because your peace is temporary. If made permanent it is called
Realisation.

Talk 156.
9th February, 1936
D.: Is solitude helpful for practice?
M.: What do you mean by solitude?
D.: To keep away from others.
M.: Why should it be done? It is actuated only by fear. Even in solitude
there is the fear of intrusion by others and of solitude being spoilt.

Moreover, how are thoughts to be erased in solitude? Should it not
be done in the present environment?
D.: But the mind is distracted now.
M.: Why do you let go the mind? Solitude amounts to making the mind
still. This can be done in a crowd too. Solitude cannot efface one’s
thoughts. Practice does it. The same practice can be made here too.
Talk 157.
D.: In the quest of I, the seeker is at a certain stage directed to keep the
mind in a negative attitude for Grace to enter. How can a negative
yield positive result?
M.: The Self is always there - not to be newly got.
D.: I mean to ask, what has been done in the negative attitude to
deserve the Grace?
M.: Are you asking this question without Grace? Grace is in the beginning,
middle and end. Grace is the Self. Because of the false identification of
the Self with the body the Guru is considered to be with body. But from
the Guru’s outlook the Guru is only the Self. The Self is one only. He
tells that the Self alone is. Is not then the Self your Guru? Where else
will Grace come from? It is from the Self alone. Manifestation of the
Self is a manifestation of Grace and vice versa. All these doubts arise
because of the wrong outlook and consequent expectation of things
external to oneself. Nothing is external to the Self.
D.: All our questions are from our standpoint and Sri Bhagavan’s
replies are from his standpoint. The questions are not only
answered, but are also undermined.

Talk 158.
11th February, 1936
Mr. Frydman: Janaka was a Jnani and still he ruled his dominions.
Does not action require activity of the mind? What is the rationale
of the working of a jnani’s mind?
M.: You say, “Janaka was a Jnani and yet active, etc.” Does Janaka ask
the question? The question is in your mind only. The Jnani is not
aware of anything besides the Self. He has no doubts of the kind.

D.: Probably it is like a dream. Just as we speak of our dreams, so
they think of their actions.
M.: Even the dream, etc. is in your mind. This explanation too is in
your mind only.
D.: Yes. I see. All is Ramana-Maya - made up of the Self.
M.: If so, there will be no duality and no talk.
D.: A man, on realising the Self, can help the world more effectively.
Is it not so?
M.: If the world be apart from the Self.

Talk 159.
12th February, 1936
Mr. Cohen desired to know if trance is a sine qua non for SelfRealisation.
M.: You are always in the Self - now, in trance, in deep sleep, in
Realisation. If you lose hold of the Self and identify yourself with
the body or the mind, these states appear to overtake you, and it
also looks like a blank in trance, etc.; whereas you are the Self
and ever-present.
D.: Sri Aurobindo says that the Light which resides in the head must
be brought down to the heart below.
M.: Is not the Self already in the Heart? How can the all-pervading
Self be taken from one place to another?
D.: Is a karma yogi or a bhakta too subject to trance?
M.: When you concentrate on one point you merge in it, and this merging
is called trance. The other features disappear and the Self alone
remains over. The karmi or bhakta also must experience the same.
Talk 160.
D.: What is the hridaya and what the sphurana therein? How do
they appear?
M.: The hridaya and the sphurana are the same as the Self. The
sphurana requires a basis for its manifestation. This is explained
in the book Vichara Sangraham (Self-Enquiry).

D.: How does the sphurana appear - as light, movement, or what?
M.: How can it be described in words? It includes all these - It is
the Self. Fix your attention on it and do not let go the idea of its
ultimate character.

Talk 161.
13th February, 1936
An elderly man from Ananthapur, after hearing the Vedas recited in
the hall, stood up and asked:
“It is said that the non-Brahmins should not hear the recital of the
Vedas.”
M.: Mind your business. Take care of what you came here for. Why
do you waste your time in these matters? “I heard the recital,” you
say. “Who is that ‘I’? Without knowing the ‘I’ you are using the
word. If its significance be known there will be no doubt. Find the
‘I’ first and you may afterwards speak of other matters.”
Continuing, Sri Bhagavan said:
“The smritis say something. They are not appropriate now. I
will reform the world, rewrite the smritis.” Saying so, people are
cutting capers in the world from time immemorial. Such reformers
have come and gone; but the ancient smritis still stand. Why
waste time over such matters? Let each one mind his business.
All will be well.

Talk 162.
23rd February, 1936
A Maharashtra lady of middle-age, who had studied Jnaneswari,
Bhagavata and Vichara Sagara, and was practising concentration
between the eyebrows, had felt shivering and fear, and did not
progress. She required guidance.
Maharshi told her not to forget the seer. The sight is fixed between
the eyebrows, but the seer is not kept in view. If the seer be always
remembered it will be all right.

Talk 163.
24th February, 1936
Dr. Henry Hand, an American of about seventy, asked “What is ego?”
M.: Ego being internal and not external to you it must be clear to yourself.
D.: What is its definition?
M.: The definition also must proceed from the ego. The ego must
define itself.
D.: What is soul?
M.: Find the ego, the soul is found.
D.: Are they then the same?
M.: Soul can be without the ego; but the ego cannot be without the
soul. They are like bubble and the ocean.
D.: That clarifies the matter. What is Atman?
M.: Atman and soul are the same.
Talk 164.
Another American asked about thought-forms.
M.: Trace the source of thoughts, they will disappear.
D.: Thoughts materialise.
M.: If there be thoughts they will materialise. If they disappear there
is nothing to materialise. Moreover if you are physical the world
is physical and so on. Find out if you are physical.
D.: How shall I be useful to God’s world?
M.: Find out if ‘I’ is different from the divine part of the world. Not being
able to help yourself yet you are seeking the divine part of it to help
you to help the world. The divinity is directing and controlling you.
Where do you go in deep sleep? Wherefrom do you come out?
D.: I have been influenced by deeds and thoughts.
M.: Thoughts and deeds are the same.
D.: Is there any way of sensing super-physical phenomena, e.g.,
guardian angels?
M.: The state of the object is according to the state of the seer.

D.: A group of seers see the same.
M.: Because there is only one seer behind all, and there is diversity
of phenomena. Do you perceive diversity in deep sleep?
D.: We see Abraham Lincoln who died long ago.
M.: Is there the object without the seer? The experiences may be real.
The objects are only according to the seer.
D.: An assistant of mine was killed in the war. A photo was taken
of another group nine years after his death. His picture appears in
the photo. How is it?
M.: Possibly thoughts have materialised ... Go to the root of it.
D.: How?
M.: If the way is external, directions are possible, but it lies within. Seek
within. The Self is always realised. Something not already realised
might be sought afresh. But the Self is within your experience.
D.: Yes. I realise myself.
M.: Myself. Are there two - my and self?
D.: I do not mean it.
M.: Who is it that has or has not realised?
D.: There is only one Self.
M.: The question can arise only if there be two. Abandon the wrong
identification of the Self with the non-self.
D.: I mean the higher stage of consciousness.
M.: There are no stages.
D.: Why does not a man get illumination instantly.
M.: The man is illumination itself. He is illumining
D.: Is your teaching different from that of others?
M.: The path is one and the realisation is only one.
D.: But people speak of so many methods.
M.: Depending on their own state of mentality.
D.: What is yoga?
M.: Yoga (union) is for one in viyoga (separation). But there is only
one. If you realise the Self there will be no difference.

D.: Is there efficacy in bathing in the Ganges?
M.: The Ganges is within you. This Ganges does not make you feel
cold or shiver. Bathe in it.
D.: Should we read Gita once in a while?
M.: Always.
D.: May we read the Bible?
M.: The Bible and the Gita are the same.
D.: The Bible teaches that Man is born in sin.
M.: The Man is sin. There was no man-sense in deep sleep. The body-thought
brings out the idea of sin. The birth of thought is itself sin.
To another question the Master said: Everyone sees only the Self.
The divine forms are only like bubbles in the ocean of Reality, or
like pictures moving on a screen.
D.: The Bible says that the human soul may be lost.
M.: The ‘I-thought’ is the ego and that is lost. The real ‘I’ is “I am
That I Am.”
D.: There is conflict in the teachings of Aurobindo and of the Mother.
M.: First surrender the Self and then harmonise the conflicts.
D.: What is Renunciation?
M.: Giving up of the ego.
D.: Is it not giving up possessions?
M.: The possessor too.
D.: The world will change if the people will give up their possessions
for the benefit of others.
M.: First give yourself up and then think of the rest.
In answer to another question Sri Bhagavan said:
The methods appear easy according to the nature of the individual.
It depends on what he has practised before.
D.: Can we not get realisation instantaneously?
M.: Realisation is nothing new. It is eternal. There is no question of
instantaneous or gradual realisation.
D.: Is there reincarnation?

M.: Reincarnation can be if you are incarnate now. Even now you
are not born.
To another question:
M.: The ego is the root of all diseases. Give it up.
There will be no disease.
D.: If all renounce will there be a practical world? Who will plough?
Who will harvest?
M.: Realise first and then see. The help through Realisation
transcends all the help through words, thoughts and deeds, etc. If
you understand your own reality then that of the rishis and masters
will be clear to you. There is only one master and that is the Self.
D.: Why do masters insist on silence and receptivity?
M.: What is silence? It is eternal eloquence.
D.: What is receptive attitude of mind?
M.: Not to be distracted in mind.
D.: Is there use in bringing America and India closer by bringing the
intelligentsia of the two countries together, say, by exchange of
professors, etc.?
M.: Such events will take place automatically. There is a Power
guiding the destinies of nations. These questions arise only when
you have lost touch with Reality. Is America apart from you, or
India apart? Get hold of it and see.
D.: Sri Ramakrishna prepared Vivekananda. What is the power behind?
M.: The power is only one in all.
D.: What is the nature of that force?
M.: Just like iron filings drawn towards a magnet, the force is inside
and not outside. Ramakrishna was in Vivekananda. If you think
Vivekananda to be a body, Ramakrishna also is a body. But they
are not bodies. Vivekananda could not go into Samadhi had not
Ramakrishna been within him.
D.: Why should one suffer when stung by a scorpion?
M.: What is the cause of the appearance of the body and of the world?
D.: It is part of the cosmic mind.

M.: Let the cosmic mind worry about such happenings. If the
individual wants to know let him discover his Self.
D.: About yogic mysteries of drinking nitric acid, swallowing poisons,
walking on fire, etc., are these due to a state of vibration?
M.: Let the physical body question it. You are not physical. Why
worry about what you are not. If the Self had any form it might be
affected by objects. But the Self has no form, therefore it is immune
from contact with things.
D.: What is the significance of the sea of Love?
M.: Spirit, Holy Ghost, Realisation, Love, etc., are all synonymous.
D.: Very, very illuminating conversation.
Mr. N. Subba Rao: What is visishtadvaita?
M.: The same as this.
D.: They do not admit maya?
M.: Sarvam is Brahman, we say. They repeat Brahman remains
qualified (visishta) in all.
D.: They say that the world is a reality.
M.: We say so too. Acharya has only said, “Find out the reality behind
the world.” What is called illusion by one is called changefulness
by another. The end is the same in both.
Dr. Hand: Maharshi! Do not think we are bad boys.
M.: Do not tell me so. But you need not think you are bad boys.
All laughed and dispersed at 5 p.m.
Sri Bhagavan a minute later: If they remain a day longer they will
become silent.
Talk 165.
Mr. Subba Rao: Do not men go into samadhi?
M.: Is there no samadhi now?
D.: Is it eternal?
M.: If not, how can it be real?
D.: Then?
M.: There is no then, no now.

D.: It appears so.
M.: To whom?
D.: To the mind.
M.: What is mind? Who am I?
D.: (Silence).
Talk 166.
A man asked if it was possible to ward off old age and disease by the
intake of divine force.
M.: You can ward off the body itself.
D.: How to take in the divine force?
M.: It is already there. No need to take it in. It can be done only
if it is out of you. But it is only you. There is no taking in or
giving out.
D.: Is there any necessity to obey physical laws, i.e., dieting?
M.: These are in imagination only.
Talk 167.
A man was worried because he could not succeed in concentrating
the mind.
M.: Is it not only One even now? It always remains One only.
Diversity lies in your imagination only. Unitary Being need
not be acquired.
Talk 168.
It was mentioned to Sri Bhagavan that a Self-realised being needs
no food, etc.
M.: You understand according to your state only.
Talk 169.
D.: How to control the mind?
M.: Catch hold of the mind.
D.: How?
M.: What is mind? Find it out. It is only an aggregate of thoughts.

D.: How to root out sexual impulse?
M.: By rooting out the false idea of the body being Self. There is no
sex in the Self.
D.: How to realise it?
M.: Because you think you are the body, you see another as the body.
Difference in sex arises. But you are not the body. Be the real Self.
Then there is no sex.
Talk 170.
D.: Can a yogi know his past lives?
M.: Do you know the present life so well that you wish to know
the past. Find out the present life, then the rest will follow.
Even with our present limited knowledge we suffer so much.
Why do you wish to burden yourself with more knowledge and
suffer more?
D.: Can fasting help realisation?
M.: But it is temporary. Mental fast is the real aid. Fasting is not an
end in itself. There must be spiritual development side by side.
Absolute fasting makes the mind weak too. You cannot derive
sufficient strength for the spiritual quest. Therefore take moderate
food and go on practising.
D.: They say that after breaking a month’s fast, ten days afterwards
the mind becomes pure and steady and remains so forever.
M.: Yes, if the spiritual quest has been kept up right through the fast
also.
Talk 171.
To another question Master said: The best is heart to heart speech and
heart to heart hearing. That is the best upadesa.
D.: Is not guidance from Guru necessary?
M.: Are you apart from Guru?
D.: Is proximity helpful?
M.: Do you mean physical proximity? What is the good of it? The
mind alone matters. The mind must be contacted.

Talk 172.
28th February, 1936
A visitor: What is the difference between meditation (dhyana) and
investigation (vichara)?
M.: Both amount to the same. Those unfit for investigation must practise
meditation. In this practice the aspirant forgetting himself meditates
‘I am Brahman’ or ‘I am Siva’; thus he continues to hold to Brahman
or Siva; this will ultimately end on the residual Being as Brahman or
Siva which he will realise to be Pure Being, i.e. the Self.
He who engages in investigation starts holding on to himself, asks
‘Who am I?’ and the Self becomes clear to him.
D.: Will the knowledge gained by direct experience be lost afterwards?
M.: Kaivalya Navanita says it may be lost. Experience gained without
rooting out all the vasanas cannot remain steady. Efforts must be
made to eradicate the vasanas. Otherwise rebirth after death takes
place. Some say direct experience results from hearing from one’s
master; others say it is from reflection; yet others say from one-pointedness
and also from samadhi. Though they look different on
the surface, ultimately they mean the same. Knowledge can remain
unshaken only after all the vasanas are rooted out.

Talk 173.
29th February, 1936
D.: Lord, how can the grip of the ego be slackened?
M.: By not adding new vasanas to it.
D.: Any amount of japa has not slackened the grip!
M.: How so! It will duly slacken and vanish.

Talk 174.
2nd March, 1936
Dr. Hand, the American gentleman, asked: Are there two methods for
finding the source of the ego?
M.: There are no two sources and no two methods. There is only one
source and only one method.

D.: What is the difference between meditation and enquiry into the Self?
M.: Meditation is possible only if the ego be kept up. There is the ego
and the object meditated upon. The method is indirect. Whereas the
Self is only one. Seeking the ego, i.e., its source, ego disappears.
What is left over is the Self. This method is the direct one.
D.: Then what am I to do?
M.: To hold on to the Self.
D.: How?
M.: Even now you are the Self. But you are confounding this consciousness
(or ego) with the absolute consciousness. This false identification is
due to ignorance. Ignorance disappears along with the ego. Killing
the ego is the only thing to accomplish. Realisation is already there.
No attempt is needed to attain realisation. For it is nothing external,
nothing new. It is always and everywhere here and now too.

Talk 175.
3rd March, 1936
Mr. N. Subba Rao asked: The Visishtadvatins say that Atma Sakshatkara
(Self-Realisation) is preliminary to Paramatma Sakshatkara (God-Realisation).
The difficulty seems to be considerable.
M.: What is Atma Sakshatkara? Are there two Atmas that one realises
the other? There are not two selves. First get Atma Sakshatkara
and then judge what follows.
D.: The Bhagavad Gita says there is God whose body is made up of
all the souls.
M.: All are agreed on the annihilation of the ego. Let us get to business
on the agreed point. Nanajivatva (different individualities) are
mentioned by some Advaitins also. All that is immaterial to one’s
spiritual uplift. First realise the Self and then see what lies further.

Talk 176.
7th March, 1936
Dr. Hand intends leaving the Asramam tomorrow, visit the Himalayas
(Hardwar), return here, go to Bombay and embark for Egypt, Palestine,
Europe and finally to his native land, America.

He wants to go to the peak of the hill and desires Sri Bhagavan to
accompany him. Sri Bhagavan might go up as high as is convenient
for him and then wait for him to finish the climb - and catch him at
an appointed spot on the hill. Sri Bhagavan smiled and asked him if
he had heard of the experience of Dr. Beasly.
Dr. Hand: He is my friend. He has told me everything - wonderful!
I am older than you, Maharshi. But do not give me up as a back
number. I can climb up the hill as a boy would. When did you go
to the peak last?
M.: About eleven years before. What did Dr. Beasly say?
D.: It is in strict confidence. I shall tell you everything if you are left
alone with me.
Maharshi simply smiled.
D.: Maharshi! Are you conscious of a brotherhood of invisible rishis?
M.: If invisible, how to see them?
D.: In consciousness.
M.: There is nothing external in consciousness.
D.: Is there not the individuality? I fear to lose my individual being.
Is there not in consciousness the consciousness of being human?
M.: Why fear to lose individuality? What is your state in dreamless
sleep? Are you conscious of your individuality then?
D.: It is possible.
M.: But what is your experience? If individuality be there, would it
be deep sleep?
D.: That depends on the interpretation. What does Maharshi say?
M.: Maharshi cannot speak for your experience. He does not force
anything down your throat.
D.: I know. That is why I like Him and His teachings so much.
M.: Do you not really prepare your bed and are you not anxious to
lose your individuality in deep sleep? Why fear it?
D.: What is the nirvana of Buddha?
M.: Loss of individuality.
D.: I dread that loss. Can there not be human consciousness in nirvana?

M.: Are there two selves in that case? Consider your present experience
of sleep and say.
D.: I should think it possible to retain individual consciousness in
nirvana. I fear the loss of individuality.
Later, the questioner went up and round the hill and wandered about
fifteen miles between twelve noon and eight p.m. He returned tired
and gave a very lucid speech on agriculture, social conditions, caste
system, spiritual quality of the Indians, etc.

Talk 177.
10th March, 1936
D.: What is mahat?
M.: The projected light from Absolute Consciousness. Just as a seed
swells up before sprouting and then sprouts and grows, so also the
Absolute Consciousness projects light, manifests as the ego and
grows up as the body and the universe.
Chit

=

Absolute

Mahat

=

Ahankara

=

projected consciousness
(swollen seed)
ego

Manas

=

mind

=

body

Aham

Idam

world

Maj. Chadwick: Is it the same as cosmic consciousness?
M.: Yes, it is so before the birth of the ego and the universe. It
comprises them all. Just as all the pictures thrown on the screen
are visible by the light projected from a spot, so also the body and
the other objects are all visible in that reflected consciousness. It
is, therefore, also cosmic consciousness.
Again, (in the microcosm) the body and all other objects are all
contained in the brain. The light is projected on the brain. The

impressions in the brain become manifest as the body and the
worlds. Because the ego identifies itself with limitations, the body
is considered separate and the world separate.
Lying down on your bed in a closed room with eyes closed
you dream of London, the crowds there and you among them.
A certain body is identified as yourself in the dream. London
and the rest could not have entered into the room and into your
brain; however, such wide space and duration of time were all
perceptible to you. They must have been projected from the
brain. Although the world is so big and the brain so small, is
it not a matter of wonder that such a big creation is contained
in such small compass as one’s brain? Though the screen is
limited, still all the pictures of the cinema pass on it and are
visible there. You do not wonder how such a long procession
of events could be manifest on such a small screen. Similarly
with the objects and the brain.
D.: Then cosmic consciousness is not the same as realisation?
M.: Cosmic consciousness is behind the ego. It may be called Isvara,
and the ego is jiva. Isvara may also be said to be the Absolute.
There is no difference there.

Jiva

Para

= Absolute

Isvara

= Cosmic consciousness (Mahat)

Jagat = Individual consciousness and the world

The consciousness which pervades even Isvara is the Absolute one.
Talk 178.
D.: What is the flame mentioned in Vichara Sangraha. It is said to be
Atma Jyoti and one is directed to find the reality behind it.
M.: The Vedas mention the flame, Tasyas sikhaya madhye
paramatma vyavasthitah. That flame is to be identified with the
ego-consciousness.

Talk 179.
11th March, 1936
Mr. Frydman had asked Swami Ramdas something, to which he replied
that there would be no more births for himself. The engineer had pointed
out there should be no anxiety regarding rebirth. There will be the same
Rama, the same Ramdas, the same search for Rama and the same bliss
of realisation. What objection could be there for the repetition of this
Rama-Lila? Ramdas had admitted that there could be no objection,
that it would be an enjoyment and a game. The engineer further said
that Ramdas added that Ramdas had found Rama merged in Him and
happy in that union. They are the same, still there was Ramdas, there
was Rama, there was the union, there was the Bliss. That is eternal.
Saying it, he asked what Sri Bhagavan would say to it.
M.: It is all as true as the present events.
Talk 180.
Later, the same gentleman said that sleep was a state of oblivion and
the wakeful state was the mind’s activity. The mind was in a potential
state in sleep.
M.: Were you not in sleep?
D.: Yes, I was. But in a state of oblivion. There must be a witness
of oblivion and of the mind which says that ‘I’ am continuous in
both states.
M.: Who is this witness? You speak of ‘witness’. There must be an
object and a subject to witness. These are creations of the mind. The
idea of witness is in the mind. If there was the witness of oblivion
did he say, ‘I witness oblivion’? You, with your mind, said just
now that there must be a witness. Who was the witness? You must
reply ‘I’. Who is that ‘I’ again? You are identifying yourself with
the ego and say ‘I’. Is this ego ‘I’, the witness? It is the mind that
speaks. It cannot be witness of itself. With self-imposed limitations
you think that there is a witness of mind and of oblivion. You also
say, “I am the witness”. That one who witnesses the oblivion must
say, “I witness oblivion”. The present mind cannot arrogate to itself
that position.

The whole position becomes thus untenable. Consciousness
is unlimited. On becoming limited it simply arrogates to itself
the position. There is really nothing to witness. IT is. simple
BEING.
Talk 181.
D.: Yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama. Which is that
dhama? Is it not the Absolute state beyond cosmic consciousness?
M.: Yes.
D.: ‘Na Nivartante’ would mean not covered by ignorance again.
M.: Yes.
D.: Does it follow by inference that those who reach Cosmic
Consciousness have not escaped from the clutches of ignorance?
M.: That is what is meant by saying that all lokas, even the Brahma
loka, do not release one from rebirth. Vide. the Bhagavad Gita:
“Reaching ME, there is no rebirth .... All others are in bondage.”
Moreover, so long as you think that there is gati (movement) - as
implied in the word gatva (having gone to) - there is punaravritti
(return) also. Again gati implies your Purvagamanam (birth). What
is birth? It is birth of ego.
Once born you reach something; if you reach it you return also.
Therefore leave off all this verbiage! Be as you are. See who
you are and remain as the Self, free from birth, going, coming and
returning.
D.: True. However often this truth is heard, still it eludes us and we
forget it.
M.: Quite so. Reminders are often necessary.
Talk 182.
In the course of the day an interesting photo was missing. Sri Bhagavan
appeared concerned about it. Mr. Frydman asked how Sri Bhagavan
viewed all these matters. Sri Bhagavan said: “Suppose you dream that
you are taking me to Poland. You wake up and ask me. ‘I dreamt so
and so. Did you dream so or know it? Or how do you view it’?”
D.: But you are not aware of the happenings in front of you?

M.: These are all workings of the mind and the questions also.
Then again Sri Bhagavan related an episode in Sri Rama’s search for
Sita. Parvati asked Siva why Rama, the Perfect Being, was grieving at
the loss of Sita. Siva said that Rama was still Perfect. If the Perfection
need be tested and made clear, Parvati might appear as Sita before Rama
and see what happened. So she did. Rama ignored her appearance and
was still crying out, “Ha! Sita! Ha! Sita!” and moved on like a blind
man, without taking any notice of Parvati - (Cf. Dialogue 218.)

Talk 183.
13th March, 1936
A gentleman from Bombay said: “I asked Mother in Sri Aurobindo
Ashram the following question: ‘I keep my mind blank without
thoughts arising so that God might show Himself in His true Being.
But I do not perceive anything.
“The reply was to this effect: ‘The attitude is right. The Power will
come down from above. It is a direct experience’.”
So he asked what further he should do.
M.: Be what you are. There is nothing to come down or become
manifest. All that is needful is to lose the ego, That what is, is
always there. Even now you are That. You are not apart from it.
The blank is seen by you. You are there to see the blank. What do
you wait for? The thought “I have not seen,” the expectation to see
and the desire of getting something, are all the working of the ego.
You have fallen into the snares of the ego. The ego says all these
and not you. Be yourself and nothing more!
Talk 184.
M.: To imagine Muladhara at the bottom, the Heart at the centre, or
the head at the top or over all these, is all wrong. In one word, to
think is not your real nature.
Talk 185.
M.: In the sacred literature the following are seen:“Said without uttering”
“Showed remaining still as ever,” etc.

Which is this unspoken word? It is only Silence, Pranava or the
Mahavakya.* These are also called the Word.
Talk 186.
M.: We read a newspaper and all the articles therein, but do not care
to know anything about the paper itself. We take the chaff but not
the substance. The substratum on which all this is printed is the
paper and if we know the substratum all else will be known (like
wall and paintings).
D.: You said the only ONE which exists is the REAL. What is that
only ONE?
M.: The ONE only is the Sat, the existence, that appears as the world,
the things that we see and we ourselves.
D.: What is Atman? Is there a finality for the ATMAN?
M.: First learn what is Atman. If we know this then we can query as
to whether it has a finality or not. Which do you call ATMAN?
D.: Jiva is ATMAN.
M.: Learn what jiva is. What is the difference between jiva and Atman?
Is jiva itself Atman or is there any separate thing as Atman? There is
an end for what you observe; that which is created has a destruction or
end. That which is not created has no end. That which exists cannot be
observed. It is unobservable. We must find out what it is that appears;
the destruction of that which appears is the end. That which exists,
exists for ever; that which newly appears is later lost.
D.: What happens after birth in human form, what happens to the jiva?
M.: Let us know first what we are. We do not understand what we
are, and until we know what we are there is no room for such a
question. (Bhagavan obviously here refers to the confusion of body
as Atman - dehatma buddhi - which is the cause for this confusion
of ideas of death and birth, for Atman has no birth or death, it is
untainted by the elements of Earth, Fire, Air and Water, etc.) (Gita
II, 11) - Asochyam anvosochas tvam, projnavadamscha bhashase,
etc. - What is it that had birth? Whom do you call a man? If, instead
of seeking explanation for birth, death and after-death matters, the
____________________________________________________
* Mahavakyas are four: (1) “That art Thou.” (2) “I am Brahman.” (3) “This Self is
Brahman.” (4) “Prajnana (Absolute Knowledge) is Brahman.”

question is raised as to who and how you are now, these questions
will not arise. You are the same while asleep (deep sleep), in dream
and in waking state. Is the ‘I’ thought jiva, or the body jiva? Is this
thought or nature? Or is the experience that we live, etc., our nature?
(Quotes the sloka from the Gita: Yada te . . . II, 52.)
D.: Why is Atma vichara necessary?
M.: If you do not make Atma vichara, then loka vichara creeps in. That
which is not, is sought for, but not that which is obvious. When once
you have found what you seek, vichara (enquiry) also ceases and you
rest in it. As long as one is confusing the body with the Atman, Atman
is said to be lost and one is said to seek for it, but the ATMAN itself
is never lost. It always exists. A body is said to be Atman, an indriya
is said to be Atman, then there is the Jivatman and Paramatman and
what not. There are a thousand and one things called Atman. The
search for Atman is to know that which is really Atman.

SAMADHI: KEVALA AND SAHAJA
Talk 187.
D.: I maintain that the physical body of the man sunk in samadhi as a
result of unbroken contemplation of the Self becomes motionless
for that reason. It may be active or inactive. The mind fixed in such
contemplation will not be affected by the body or the senses being
restless. A disturbance of the mind is not always the forerunner of
physical activity. Another man asserts that physical unrest certainly
prevents nirvikalpa samadhi or unbroken contemplation. What is
your opinion? You are the standing proof of my statement.
M.: Both of you are right, you refer to sahaja nirvikalpa and the other
refers to kevala nirvikalpa. In the one case the mind lies immersed
in the Light of the Self (whereas the same lies in the darkness of
ignorance in deep sleep). The subject discriminates one from the
other - samadhi, stirring up from samadhi, and activity thereafter,
unrest of the body, of the sight of the vital force and of the mind, the
cognizance of objects and activity, are all obstructions for him.
In sahaja, however, the mind has resolved itself into the Self and
has been lost. Differences and obstructions mentioned above do
not therefore exist here. The activities of such a being are like the

feeding of a somnolent boy, perceptible to the onlooker (but not to
the subject). The driver sleeping on his moving cart is not aware
of the motion of the cart, because his mind is sunk in darkness.
Similarly the sahaja Jnani remains unaware of his bodily activities
because his mind is dead - having been resolved in the ecstasy of
Chit Ananda (Self).
The two words contemplation and samadhi have been used loosely
in the question.
Contemplation is a forced mental process, whereas samadhi lies
beyond effort.
Sleep
(1) mind alive
(2) sunk in
oblivion

Kevala
(1) mind alive
(2) sunk in light

Sahaja
(1) mind dead
(2) resolved into the Self;

(3) like a bucket with (3) like a river discharged
the rope left lying
into the ocean and its
in the water in a
identity lost;
well;
(4) to be drawn out by (4) a river cannot be
the other end of the
redirected from the
rope.
ocean.
Talk 188.
The essence of mind is only awareness or consciousness. When the
ego, however, dominates it, it functions as the reasoning, thinking or
sensing faculty. The cosmic mind being not limited by the ego, has
nothing separate from itself and is therefore only aware. This is what
the Bible means by “I am that I AM”.
The ego-ridden mind has its strength sapped and is too weak to resist
the torturing thoughts. The egoless mind is happy in deep, dreamless
sleep. Clearly therefore Bliss and misery are only modes of mind;
but the weak mode is not easily interchangeable with the strong
mode. Activity is weakness and consequently miserable; passivity is
strength and therefore blissful. The dormant strength is not apparent
and therefore not availed of.

The cosmic mind, manifesting in some rare being, is able to effect
the linkage in others of the individual (weak) mind with the universal
(strong) mind of the inner recess. Such a rare being is called the GURU
or God in manifestation.

Talk 189.
19th May, 1936
Mr. M. Oliver Lacombe, a middle-aged Frenchman who was on a visit
to India being delegated by the Institute of Indian Civilisation of the
University of Paris, came here from French India. Among others he had
desired to meet Maharshi; he came and stayed here about three hours.
He had read, in the Sanskrit original, the Bhagavad Gita, the Upanishads
and the Sutras with commentaries by Sri Sankara and Ramanuja.
He asked: Is Maharshi’s teaching the same as Sankara’s?
M.: Maharshi’s teaching is only an expression of his own experience
and realisation. Others find that it tallies with Sri Sankara’s.
D.: Quite so. Can it be put in other ways to express the same
realisation?
M.: A realised person will use his own language. Sri Bhagavan added:
SILENCE is the best language.
D.: What does Maharshi say about hatha yoga or Tantric practices?
M.: Maharshi does not criticise any of the existing methods. All are good
for the purification of the mind. Because the purified mind alone is
capable of grasping his method and sticking to its practice.
D.: Which is the best of the different yogas, Karma, Jnana, Bhakti
or Hatha?
M.: See stanza 10 of “Upadesa Sara”. To remain in the Self amounts
to all these in their highest sense.
Maharshi added: In dreamless sleep there is no world, no ego and
no unhappiness. But the Self remains. In the waking state there
are all these; yet there is the Self. One has only to remove the
transitory happenings in order to realise the ever-present beatitude
of the Self. Your nature is Bliss. Find that on which all the rest are
superimposed and you then remain as the pure Self.

D.: Yes. It amounts to the removal of alien limitations for discovering
the ever-present Self. That is what Sankara says. There is no
attainment or loss.
M.: Quite so. (Aside) He understands.
D.: How is work to be done ordinarily for an aspirant?
M.: Without self-identification with the actor. For instance, did you
intend visiting this place while in Paris?
D.: No!
M.: You see how you are acting without your intention to do so? The
Gita says that a man cannot remain without acting. The purpose
of one’s birth will be fulfilled whether you will it or not. Let the
purpose fulfil itself.
D.: Why are there so many methods mentioned? For instance Sri
Ramakrishna says that bhakti is the best means for salvation.
M.: It is according to the standpoint of the aspirant. You have studied
the Gita. Sri Krishna said: “There was never a time when I, and you,
and these kings were not; nor will they not be in future. That which
is unreal never exists. But that which is real never disappears. All
that ever was even now is and will ever be.” Again, “I taught this
Truth to Aditya; he taught it to Manu; etc.” Arjuna asked: “How
can it be? You were born some years back and only recently. How
could you have taught Aditya?” Sri Krishna answered; “Yes. We
have had several births in the past. I know mine; whereas you do
not know yours. I tell you what happened in those past births.”
Look! That Krishna who began saying there was not I, nor were you,
nor these kings, says now that he had several births before. Krishna
does not contradict Himself, though it looks like it. He conforms to
the outlook of Arjuna and speaks to him from his level.
There is a parallel passage in the Bible where Jesus says, “Before
Abraham was, I am”. The teachings of the Sages are suited to the
time, place, people and other surroundings.
The visitor said he was leaving with regret. ...
Maharshi smilingly interrupted, “There is no leaving or returning.”
The Frenchman at once said, “He has transcended time and space.”
He returned to Pondicherry.

Talk 190.
30th May, 1936
There is a pet squirrel in the hall which usually retires into its cage
before nightfall. Just as Maharshi was telling it to retire for the night
a visitor who had announced that he had attained the transcendent
consciousness suggested that water might be offered to it, since
it was likely to be thirsty on this hot evening. His presumption to
understand animals evoked no response. He repeated it. After a few
minutes’ silence Maharshi said, “You are probably thirsty after your
long meditation in the hot Sun on the hotter rocks and you would like
to drink a jug of water.”
D.: Quite so. I have taken water.
M.: The squirrel is not so thirsty. Because you were practising
austerities in the heat of the Sun you should feel thirsty. Why
prescribe it for the squirrel?
Maharshi added: I noticed him standing on the hot rocks facing the
Sun with eyes closed. I stood there for a while but did not want to
disturb him and came away. These people do as they please.
D.: What I did, I did not intend beforehand. It was spontaneous.
M.: Oh! I see! Whatever we others do, we do with intention! You
seem to have transcended all!
D.: This is not the first time I did so. You yourself inspire me and make
me do all these things. Yet you ask me why I did it. How is it?
M.: I see. You are doing actions being controlled by me. Then the fruits
also should be considered similarly to be mine and not yours.
D.: So they are undoubtedly. I act not of my free will but inspired by
you. I have no will of my own.
M.: Enough of this rubbish! So did Duryodhana of old (in the
Mahabharata) say:
janami dharmam nacha me pravrittih,
janamyadharmam nacha me nivrittih.
kenapi devana hridi sthitena
yatha niyuktosmitatha karomi.

What is the difference between you two?
D.: I see no difference. But I have no will and act without it.
M.: You have risen high above the common run. We others are acting
with personal will.
D.: How, Sir? You have said in one of your works that action can be
automatic.
M.: Enough! Enough! You and another visitor behave as transcendental
beings! You are both fully learned. You need not learn more. I would
not have said all this had you not been coming here frequently. Do
as you please. But these eccentricities of the beginner’s stage will
become known in their true light after some time.
D.: But I have been in this state for such a long time.
M.: Enough!
Talk 191.
Mr. Cohen, a resident disciple, was speaking of yoga method.
Maharshi remarked: Patanjali’s first sutra is applicable to all systems
of yoga. The aim is the cessation of mental activities. The methods
differ. So long as there is effort made towards that goal it is called
yoga. The effort is the yoga.
The cessation can be brought about in so many ways.
(1) By examining the mind itself. When the mind is examined, its
activities cease automatically. This is the method of jnana. The
pure mind is the Self.
(2) Looking for the source of the mind is another method. The
source may be said to be God or Self or consciousness.
(3) Concentrating upon one thought make all other thoughts
disappear. Finally that thought also disappears; and
(4) Hatha Yoga.
All methods are one and the same inasmuch as they all tend to the
same goal.
It is necessary to be aware while controlling thoughts. Otherwise
it will lead to sleep. That awareness, the chief factor, is indicated
by the fact of Patanjali emphasising pratyahara, dharana, dhyana,
samadhi even after pranayama. Pranayama makes the mind steady

and suppresses thoughts. Then why develop further? Because
awareness then is the one necessary factor. Such states can be
imitated by taking morphia, chloroform, etc. They do not lead to
Moksha because they lack awareness.

Talk 192.
3rd June, 1936
Maharshi explained in the course of conversation:
Whoever desires liberation? Everyone wants only happiness -
happiness too as found in the enjoyment of the senses. This question
was asked of a Guru, and the latter answered: “Quite so. That
happiness which is the result of enjoyment by the senses is the same
as that of liberation. That desire of such liberation is one of the four
qualifications for attainment. This is common to all. So all are eligible
for this knowledge - Self-knowledge.”
In fact there may not be found any individual in the world who possesses all
the qualities in perfection necessary for an aspirant as mentioned in Yoga
Sutras, etc. Still pursuit of Self-knowledge should not be abandoned.
Everyone is the Self by his own experience. Still he is not aware, he
identifies the Self with the body and feels miserable. This is the greatest
of all mysteries. One is the Self. Why not abide as the Self and be done
with miseries?
In the beginning one has to be told that he is not the body, because he
thinks that he is the body only. Whereas he is the body and all else.
The body is only a part. Let him know it finally. He must first discern
consciousness from insentience and be the consciousness only. Later
let him realise that insentience is not apart from consciousness.
This is discrimination (viveka). The initial discrimination must persist
to the end. Its fruit is liberation.
Talk 193.
Maharshi observed: Free-will and destiny are ever-existent. Destiny is
the result of past action; it concerns the body. Let the body act as may
suit it. Why are you concerned with it? Why do you pay attention to it?

Free-will and Destiny last as long as the body lasts. But wisdom (jnana)
transcends both. The Self is beyond knowledge and ignorance. Should
anything happen, it happens as the result of one’s past actions, of divine
will and of other factors.
Talk 194.
Mr. Subba Rao, a visitor from Amalapuram, asked: How to control
the mind?
M.: Get hold of the mind.
D.: How?
M.: Mind is intangible. In fact, it does not exist. The surest way of
control is to seek it. Then its activities cease.

Talk 195.
6th June, 1936
Mr. Jharka, a gentleman from the University of Benares, holding the
M.A. and the M.Sc. degrees, said that he was stricken with grief due
to bereavement of wife and children. He sought peace of mind and
asked how to get it.
M.: It is in the mind that birth and death, pleasure and pain, in short the
world and ego exist. If the mind is destroyed all these are destroyed
too. Note that it should be annihilated, not just made latent. For
the mind is dormant in sleep. It does not know anything. Still, on
waking up, you are as you were before. There is no end of grief.
But if the mind be destroyed the grief will have no background
and will disappear along with the mind.
D.: How to destroy the mind?
M.: Seek the mind. On being sought, it will disappear.
D.: I do not understand.
M.: The mind is only a bundle of thoughts. The thoughts arise because
there is the thinker. The thinker is the ego. The ego, if sought, will
vanish automatically. The ego and the mind are the same. The ego
is the root-thought from which all other thoughts arise.
D.: How to seek the mind?

M.: Dive within. You are now aware that the mind rises up from within.
So sink within and seek.
D.: I do not yet understand how it is to be done.
M.: You are practising breath-control. Mechanical breath-control will
not lead one to the goal. It is only an aid. While doing it mechanically
take care to be alert in mind and remember the ‘I’ thought and seek its
source. Then you will find that where breath sinks, there ‘I-thought’
arises. They sink and rise together. The ‘I-thought’ also will sink
along with breath. Simultaneously, another luminous and infinite
‘I-I’ will become manifest, which will be continuous and unbroken.
That is the goal. It goes by different names - God, Self, Kundalini
Sakti, Consciousness, Yoga, Bhakti, Jnana, etc.
D.: Not clear yet.
M.: When the attempt is made, it will of itself take you to the goal.

Talk 196.
9th June, 1936
A visitor asked about the three methods mentioned in Ramana Gita
- Chapter II.
Maharshi pointed out that breath-retention is an aid to control of mind,
i.e., suppression or annihilation of thoughts. One person may practise
breath-control, inhalation, exhalation and retention or retention only. Still
another type of practising meditator, on controlling the mind, controls
the breath and its retention automatically results. Watching the inhalation
and exhalation is also breath-control. These methods are only apparently
three-fold. They are in fact really one, because they lead to the same
goal. They are however differently adopted according to the stage of the
aspirant and his antecedent predisposition or tendencies. Really there are
only two methods: enquiry and devotion. One leads to the other.
D.: Seeking the ‘I’ there is nothing to be seen.
M.: Because you are accustomed to identify yourself with the body and
sight with the eyes, therefore, you say you do not see anything. What
is there to be seen? Who is to see? How to see? There is only one
consciousness which, manifesting as ‘I-thought’, identifies itself

with the body, projects itself through the eyes and sees the objects
around. The individual is limited in the waking state and expects
to see something different. The evidence of his senses will be the
seal of authority. But he will not admit that the seer, the seen and
the sight are all manifestations of the same consciousness - namely,
‘I-I’. Contemplation helps one to overcome the illusion that the Self
must be visual. In truth, there is nothing visual. How do you feel
the ‘I’ now? Do you hold a mirror before you to know your own
being? The awareness is the ‘I’. Realise it and that is the truth.
D.: On enquiry into the origin of thoughts there is a perception of ‘I’.
But it does not satisfy me.
M.: Quite right. The perception of ‘I’ is associated with a form, maybe
the body. There should be nothing associated with the pure Self.
The Self is the unassociated, pure Reality, in whose light, the body,
the ego, etc. shine. On stilling all thoughts the pure consciousness
remains over.
Just on waking from sleep and before becoming aware of the
world there is that pure ‘I-I’. Hold to it without sleeping or without
allowing thoughts to possess you. If that is held firm it does not
matter even though the world is seen. The seer remains unaffected
by the phenomena.
Talk 197.
Gul and Shirin Byramjee, two Parsi ladies of Ahmedabad, arrived
this day. They spoke at night to Maharshi: “Bhagavan! We have been
spiritually inclined from our childhood. We have read several books on
philosophy, and are attracted by Vedanta. So we read the Upanishads,
Yoga Vasishtha, Bhagavad Gita, etc. We try to meditate, but there is
no progress in our meditation. We do not understand how to realise.
Can you kindly help us towards realisation?”
M.: How do you meditate?
D.: I begin to ask myself “Who am I?”, eliminate body as not ‘I’, the
breath as not ‘I’, the mind as not ‘I’ and I am not able to proceed
further.
M.: Well, that is so far as the intellect goes. Your process is only
intellectual. Indeed, all the scriptures mention the process only to

guide the seeker to know the Truth. The Truth cannot be directly
pointed out. Hence this intellectual process.
You see, the one who eliminates all the not I cannot eliminate the
‘I’. To say ‘I am not this’ or ‘I am that’ there must be the ‘I’. This
‘I’ is only the ego or the ‘I-thought’. After the rising up of this
‘I-thought’, all other thoughts arise. The ‘I-thought’ is therefore
the root-thought. If the root is pulled out all others are at the same
time uprooted. Therefore seek the root ‘I’, question yourself “Who
am I?”; find out its source. Then all these will vanish and the pure
Self will remain ever.
D.: How to do it?
M.: The ‘I’ is always there - in deep sleep, in dream and in wakefulness.
The one in sleep is the same as that who now speaks. There is always
the feeling of ‘I’. Otherwise do you deny your existence? You do
not. You say ‘I am’. Find out who is.
D.: Even so, I do not understand. ‘I’, you say, is the wrong ‘I’ now.
How to eliminate this wrong ‘I’?
M.: You need not eliminate the wrong ‘I’. How can ‘I’ eliminate itself?
All that you need do is to find out its origin and abide there. Your
efforts can extend only thus far. Then the Beyond will take care of
itself. You are helpless there. No effort can reach it.
D.: If ‘I’ am always - here and now, why do I not feel so?
M.: That is it. Who says it is not felt? Does the real ‘I’ say it or the
false ‘I’? Examine it. You will find it is the wrong ‘I’. The wrong
‘I’ is the obstruction. It has to be removed in order that the true
‘I’ may not be hidden. The feeling that I have not realised is the
obstruction to realisation. In fact it is already realised; there is
nothing more to be realised. Otherwise, the realisation will be
new; it has not existed so far, it must take place hereafter. What
is born will also die. If realisation be not eternal it is not worth
having. Therefore what we seek is not that which must happen
afresh. It is only that which is eternal but not now known due
to obstructions; it is that we seek. All that we need do is to
remove the obstruction. That which is eternal is not known to be
so because of ignorance. Ignorance is the obstruction. Get over
this ignorance and all will be well.

The ignorance is identical with the ‘I-thought’. Find its source and
it will vanish.
The ‘I-thought’ is like a spirit which, although not palpable, rises
up simultaneously with the body, flourishes and disappears with
it. The body-consciousness is the wrong ‘I’. Give up this body-consciousness.
It is done by seeking the source ‘I’. The body does
not say ‘I am’. It is you who say, ‘I am the body!’ Find out who
this ‘I’ is. Seeking its source it will vanish.
D.: Then, will there be bliss?
M.: Bliss is coeval with Being-Consciousness. All the arguments
relating to the eternal Being of that Bliss apply to Bliss also. Your
nature is Bliss. Ignorance is now hiding that Bliss. Remove the
ignorance for Bliss to be freed.
D.: Should we not find out the ultimate reality of the world, individual
and God?
M.: These are all conceptions of the ‘I’. They arise only after the advent
of the ‘I-thought’. Did you think of them in your deep sleep? You
existed in deep sleep and the same you are now speaking. If they be
real should they not be in your sleep also? They are only dependent
upon the ‘I-thought’. Again does the world tell you ‘I am the world’?
Does the body say ‘I am body’? You say, “This is the world”, “this is
body” and so on. So these are only your conceptions. Find out who
you are and there will be an end of all your doubts.
D.: What becomes of the body after realisation? Does it exist or not?
We see realised beings acting like others.
M.: This question need not arise now. Let it be asked after realisation, if
need be. As for the realised beings let them take care of themselves.
Why do you worry about them?
In fact, after realisation the body and all else will not appear
different from the Self.
D.: Being always Being-Consciousness-Bliss, why does God place
us in difficulties? Why did He create us?
M.: Does God come and tell you that He has placed you in difficulties?
It is you who say so. It is again the wrong ‘I’. If that disappears
there will be no one to say that God created this or that.

That which is does not even say ‘I am’. For, does any doubt rise that
‘I am not’? Only in such a case should one be reminding oneself
‘I am a man’. One does not. On the other hand, if a doubt arises
whether he is a cow or a buffalo he has to remind himself that
he is not a cow, etc., but ‘I am a man.’ This would never happen.
Similarly with one’s own existence and realisation.

Talk 198.
10th June, 1936
Some ladies asked if there is rebirth of man as a lower animal.
M.: Yes. It is possible, as illustrated by Jada Bharata - the scriptural
anecdote of a royal sage, having been reborn as a deer.
D.: Is the individual capable of spiritual progress in the animal body?
M.: Not unlikely, though it is exceedingly rare
D.: What is Guru’s Grace? How does it work?
M.: Guru is the Self.
D.: How does it lead to realisation?
M.: Isvaro gururatmeti ... (God is the same as Guru and Self ...). A
person begins with dissatisfaction. Not content with the world he
seeks satisfaction of desires by prayers to God; his mind is purified;
he longs to know God more than to satisfy his carnal desires. Then
God’s Grace begins to manifest. God takes the form of a Guru and
appears to the devotee; teaches him the Truth; purifies the mind by his
teachings and contact; the mind gains strength, is able to turn inward;
with meditation it is purified yet further, and eventually remains still
without the least ripple. That stillness is the Self. The Guru is both
exterior and interior. From the exterior he gives a push to the mind
to turn inward; from the interior he pulls the mind towards the Self
and helps the mind to achieve quietness. That is Grace.
Hence there is no difference between God, Guru and Self.
Talk 199.
The ladies later asked several questions relating to their present
inability to realise the already realised, eternal Self. The sign of
Realisation would be Bliss, which was absent.

Maharshi said: There is only one consciousness. But we speak of
several kinds of consciousness, as body-consciousness, Self-consciousness.
They are only relative states of the same Absolute
consciousness. Without consciousness, time and space do not exist.
They appear in consciousness. It is like a screen on which these
are cast as pictures and move as in a cinema show. The Absolute
consciousness is our real nature.
D.: From where do these objects arise?
M.: Just from where you rise. Know the subject first and then question
about the object.
D.: It is only one aspect of the question.
M.: The subject comprehends the object also. That one aspect is an
all-comprehensive aspect. See yourself first and then see the objects.
What is not in you cannot appear outside.
D.: I am not satisfied.
M.: Satisfaction can be only when you reach the source. Otherwise
restlessness exists.
D.: Is the Supreme Being with or without attributes?
M.: Know first if you are with or without attributes.
D.: What is samadhi?
M.: One’s own true nature.
D.: Why then is effort necessary to attain it?
M.: Whose is the effort?
D.: Maharshi knows that I am ignorant.
M.: Do you know that you are ignorant? Knowledge of ignorance is
no ignorance.
All scriptures are only for the purpose of investigating if there are two
consciousnesses. Everyone’s experience proves the existence of only
one consciousness. Can that one divide itself into two? Is any division
felt in the Self? Awaking from sleep one finds oneself the same in the
wakeful as well as in the sleep states. That is the experience of each one.
The difference lies in seeking, in the outlook. Because you imagine that
you are the seer separate from the experience, this difference arises.
Experience shows that your being is the same all through.

D.: From where did ignorance come?
M.: There is no such thing as ignorance. It never arises. Everyone
is Knowledge itself. Only Knowledge does not shine easily. The
dispelling of ignorance is Wisdom which always exists - e.g., the
necklace remaining round the neck though supposed to have been
lost; or each of the ten fools failing to count himself and counting
only the others. To whom is knowledge or ignorance?
D.: Can we not proceed from external to internal?
M.: Is there any difference like that? Do you feel the difference -
external and internal - in your sleep? This difference is only with
reference to the body and arises with body-consciousness (‘I-thought’).
The so-called waking state is itself an illusion.
Turn your vision inward and then the whole world will be full of
Supreme Spirit. The world is said to be illusion. Illusion is really
Truth. Even the material sciences trace the origin of the universe
to some one primordial matter - subtle, exceedingly subtle.
God is the same both to those who say the world is real and to their
opponents. Their outlook is different. You need not entangle yourself
in such disputations. The goal is one and the same for all. Look to it.

Talk 200.
14th June, 1936
Mr. Cohen desired an explanation of the term “blazing light” used by
Paul Brunton in the last chapter of A Search in Secret India.
Maharshi: Since the experience is through the mind only it appears first as
a blaze of light. The mental predispositions are not yet destroyed. The
mind is however functioning in its infinite capacity in this experience.
As for nirvikalpa samadhi i.e., samadhi, of non-differentiation
(undifferentiated, supreme, beatific repose), it consists of pure
consciousness, which is capable of illumining knowledge or
ignorance; it is also beyond light or darkness. That it is not darkness
is certain; can it be however said to be not light? At present objects
are perceived only in light. Is it wrong to say that realisation of one’s
Self requires a light? Here light would mean the consciousness
which reveals as the Self only.

The yogis are said to see photisms of colours and lights preliminary
to Self-Realisation by the practice of yoga.
Once before Goddess Parvati practised austerities for realising the
Supreme. She saw some kinds of light. She rejected them because
they emanated from the Self, leaving the Self as it was ever before.
She determined that they were not supreme. She continued Her
austerities and experienced a limitless light. She determined that this
also was only a phenomenon and not the Supreme Reality. Still she
continued Her austerities until she gained transcendental peace. She
realised that it was Supreme, that the Self was the sole Reality.
The Taittiriya Upanishad says, “Seek Brahman through penance”.
Later on, “Penance is Brahman”. Another Upanishad says, “Itself
is penance which is again made up of wisdom alone”. “There the
sun shines not, nor the moon, nor the stars, nor fire; all these shine
forth by Its light”.
Talk 201.
The Parsi ladies asked for an illustration to explain why the Self,
though ever-present and most intimate, is not being realised.
Maharshi cited the stories of (1) Svakanthabharanam katha - the story
of the necklace, on the neck itself, not being detected; (2) Dasama
- of the ten fools who counted only nine, each of them omitting to
count himself; (3) the lion’s cub, brought up in a herd of goats; (4)
Karna not knowing his real parentage and (5) the king’s son brought
up in a low-class family.
They further asked for Maharshi’s opinion of Sri Aurobindo’s Yoga,
and his claim to have probed beyond the experiences of the Vedic
rishis and the Mother’s opinion of the fitness of her disciples to begin
with the realisation of the Upanishadic rishis.
M.: Aurobindo advises complete surrender. Let us do that first and
await results, and discuss further, if need be afterwards and not
now. There is no use discussing transcendental experiences by
those whose limitations are not divested. Learn what surrender
is. It is to merge in the source of the ego. The ego is surrendered
to the Self. Everything is dear to us because of love of the Self.

The Self is that to which we surrender our ego and let the Supreme
Power, i.e., the Self, do what it pleases. The ego is already the Self’s.
We have no rights over the ego, even as it is. However, supposing
we had, we must surrender them.
D.: What about bringing down divine consciousness from above?
M.: As if the same is not already in the Heart? “O Arjuna, I am in the
expanse of the Heart,” says Sri Krishna “He who is in the sun, is
also in this man”, says a mantra in the Upanishads. “The Kingdom
of God is within”, says the Bible. All are thus agreed that God is
within. What is to be brought down? From where? Who is to bring
what, and why?
Realisation is only the removal of obstacles to the recognition of
the eternal, immanent Reality. Reality is. It need not be taken from
place to place.
D.: What about Aurobindo’s claim to start from Self-Realisation and
develop further?
M.: Let us first realise and then see.
Then Maharshi began to speak of similar theories: The
Visishtadvaitins say that the Self is first realised and the realised
individual soul is surrendered to the universal soul. Only then is it
complete. The part is given up to the whole. That is liberation and
sayujya union. Simple Self-Realisation stops at isolating the pure
Self, says Visishtadvaita.
The siddhas say that the one who leaves his body behind as a corpse
cannot attain mukti. They are reborn. Only those whose bodies
dissolve in space, in light or away from sight, attain liberation.
The Advaitins of Sankara’s school stop short at Self-Realisation
and this is not the end, the siddhas say.
There are also others who extol their own pet theories as the best,
e.g., late Venkaswami Rao of Kumbakonam, Brahmananda Yogi
of Cuddappah, etc.
The fact is: There is Reality. It is not affected by any discussions.
Let us abide as Reality and not engage in futile discussions as to
its nature, etc.

Talk 202.
15th June, 1936
A sad-looking Punjabi gentleman announced himself to Maharshi as
having been directed to him by Sri Sankaracharya of Kamakotipeetam,
from Jalesvar near Puri, Jagannath. He is a world tourist. He has
practised Hatha Yoga and some contemplation along the lines of “I am
Brahman”. In a few moments a blank prevails, his brain gets heated
and he gets afraid of death. He wants guidance from Maharshi.
M.: Who sees the blank?
D.: I know that I see it.
M.: The consciousness overlooking the blank is the Self.
D.: That does not satisfy me. I cannot realise it.
M.: The fear of death is only after the ‘I-thought’ arises. Whose death
do you fear? For whom is the fear? There is the identification of the
Self with the body. So long as there is this, there will be fear.
D.: But I am not aware of my body.
M.: Who says that he is not aware?
D.: I do not understand.
He was then asked to say what exactly was his method of meditation.
He said: “Aham Brahmasmi” (“I am Brahman”).
M.: “I am Brahman” is only a thought. Who says it? Brahman itself
does not say so. What need is there for it to say it? Nor can the real
‘I’ say so. For ‘I’ always abides as Brahman. To be saying it is only
a thought. Whose thought is it? All thoughts are from the unreal ‘I’.
i.e., the ‘I’- thought. Remain without thinking. So long as there is
thought there will be fear.
D.: As I go on thinking of it there is forgetfulness, the brain becomes
heated and I am afraid.
M.: Yes, the mind is concentrated in the brain and hence you get a hot
sensation there. It is because of the ‘I-thought’. So long as there
is thought there will be forgetfulness. There is the thought “I am
Brahman”; forgetfulness supervenes; then the ‘I-thought’ arises and
simultaneously the fear of death also. Forgetfulness and thought

are for ‘I-thought’ only. Hold it; it will disappear as a phantom.
What remains over is the real ‘I’. That is the Self. ‘I am Brahman’
is an aid to concentration. It keeps off other thoughts. That one
thought alone persists. See whose is that thought. It will be found
to be from ‘I’. Wherefrom is the ‘I’ thought? Probe into it.
The ‘I-thought’ will vanish. The Supreme Self will shine forth of itself.
No further effort is needed.
When the one Real ‘I’ remains alone, it will not be saying; “I am
Brahman”. Does a man go on repeating “I am a man”? Unless
he is challenged, why should he declare himself a man? Does
anyone mistake oneself for a brute, that he should say “No. I am
not a brute; I am a man”? Similarly, Brahman or ‘I’ being alone,
there is no one there to challenge it and so there is no need to be
repeating “I am Brahman”.

Talk 203.
17th June, 1936
Mr. Varma, Financial Secretary of the Posts and Telegraphs
Department, Delhi: He has read Paul Brunton’s Search in Secret India
and The Secret Path. He lost his wife with whom he had led a happy
life for eleven or twelve years. In his grief he seeks solace. He does
not find solace in reading books: wants to tear them up. He does not
intend to ask questions. He simply wants to sit here and derive what
solace he can in the presence of Maharshi.
Maharshi, as if in a train of thoughts, spoke now and then to the
following effect:
It is said, “The wife is one-half of the body”. So her death is very painful.
This pain is however due to one’s outlook being physical; it disappears
if the outlook is that of the Self. The Brahadaranyaka Upanishad says,
“The wife is dear because of the love of the Self”. If the wife and others
are identified with the Self, how then will pain arise? Nevertheless
such disasters shake the mind of philosophers also.
We are happy in deep sleep. We remain then as the pure Self. The same
we are just now too. In such sleep there was neither the wife nor others
nor even ‘I’. Now they become apparent and give rise to pleasure

or pain. Why should not the Self, which was blissful in deep sleep,
continue its blissful nature even now? The sole obstruction to such
continuity is the wrong identification of the Self with the body.
The Bhagavad Gita says: “The unreal hath no being; the real never
ceaseth to be; the truth about both hath been perceived by the seers
of the essence of things.” “The real is ever real, the unreal is ever
unreal.” Again: “He is not born, nor doth he die; nor, having been,
ceaseth he anymore to be; unborn, perpetual, eternal ancient, he is
not slain when the body is slaughtered.” Accordingly, there is neither
birth nor death. Waking is birth and sleep is death.
Was the wife with you when you went out to the office, or in your
deep sleep? She was away from you. You were satisfied because of
your thought that she was somewhere. Whereas now you think that
she is not. The difference lies in the different thoughts. That is the
cause of pain. The pain is because of the thought of the wife’s non-being.
All this is the mischief of the mind. The fellow (i.e. the mind)
creates pain for himself even when there is pleasure. But pleasure
and pain are mental creations.
Again, why mourn the dead? They are free from bondage. Mourning
is the chain forged by the mind to bind itself to the dead.
“What if anyone is dead? What if anyone is ruined? Be dead yourself
- be ruined yourself”. In that sense there is no pain after one’s death.
What is meant by this sort of death? Annihilation of the ego, though
the body is alive. If the ego persists the man is afraid of death. The
man mourns another’s death. He need not do so if he predeceases them
(by waking up from the ego-dream, which amounts to killing the ego-sense).
The experience of deep sleep clearly teaches that happiness
consists in being without the body. The wise also confirm it, speaking
of liberation after the body is given up. Thus the sage is awaiting the
casting off of the body. Just as a labourer carrying a load on his head
for the sake of wages bears the burden with no pleasure, carries it to
the destination, and finally unburdens himself with relief and joy; so
also the sage bears this body, awaiting the right and destined time to
discard it. If now you are relieved of one half of the burden, i.e., the
wife, should you not be thankful and be happy for it?

Nevertheless you cannot be so because of your physical outlook.
Even men who ought to know better and who have known the teaching
about liberation after death etc., glorify liberation along with the body
and call it some mysterious power of keeping the body eternally alive!
There will be no pain if the physical outlook is given up and if the
person exists as the Self. Mourning is not the index of true love. It
betrays love of the object, of its shape only. That is not love. True love
is shown by the certainty that the object of love is in the Self and that
it can never become non-existent. (Maharshi cited the story of Ahalya
and Indra from Yoga Vasishta in this connection.)
Still it is true, pain on such occasions can only be assuaged by
association with the wise.

Talk 204.
18th June, 1936
Maharshi on Self-Illumination: The ‘I’ concept is the ego. I-illumination
is the Realisation of the Real Self. It is ever shining forth as ‘I-I’ in
the intellectual sheath. It is pure Knowledge; relative knowledge is
only a concept. The bliss of the blissful sheath is also but a concept.
Unless there is the experience, however subtle it is, one cannot say
“I slept happily”. From his intellect he speaks of his blissful sheath.
The bliss of sleep is but a concept to the person, the same as intellect.
However, the concept of experience is exceedingly subtle in sleep.
Experience is not possible without simultaneous knowledge of it
(i.e. relative knowledge).
The inherent nature of the Self is Bliss. Some kind of knowledge has
to be admitted, even in the realisation of Supreme Bliss. It may be
said to be subtler than the subtlest.
The word vijnana (clear knowledge) is used both to denote the
Realisation of the Self and knowing the objects. The Self is wisdom.
It functions in two ways. When associated with the ego the knowledge
is objective (vijnana). When divested of the ego and the Universal Self
is realised, it is also called vijnana. The word raises a mental concept.
Therefore we say that the Self-Realised Sage knows by his mind, but

his mind is pure. Again we say that the vibrating mind is impure and
the placid mind is pure. The pure mind is itself Brahman; therefore it
follows that Brahman is not other than the mind of the sage.
The Mundaka Upanishad says: “The knower of Brahman becomes
the Self of Brahman.” Is it not ludicrous? To know Him and become
Him? They are mere words. The sage is Brahman - that is all. Mental
functioning is necessary to communicate his experience. He is said to
be contemplating the unbroken expanse. The Creator, Suka and others
are also said never to swerve from such contemplation.

      
  : : : 
- Tejo Bindu Upanishad. 1 - 47

Such ‘contemplation’ is again a mere word. How is that to be
contemplated unless it is divided (into the contemplator and the
contemplated). When undivided, how is contemplation possible? What
function can Infinity have? Do we say that a river after its discharge
into the ocean has become an ocean-like river? Why should we then
speak of contemplation which has become unbroken, as being that of
unbroken Infinity? The statement must be understood in the spirit in
which it is made. It signifies the merging into the Infinite.
Self-Illumination or Self-Realisation is similar to it. The Self is ever
shining. What does this ‘I-illumination’ mean then? The expression
is an implied admission of mind function.
The gods and the sages experience the Infinite continuously and
eternally, without their vision being obscured at any moment. Their
minds are surmised by the spectators to function; but in fact they
do not. Such surmise is due to the sense of individuality in those
who draw inferences. There is no mental function in the absence of
individuality. Individuality and mind functions are co-existent. The
one cannot remain without the other.
The light of the Self can be experienced only in the intellectual sheath.
Therefore vijnana of whatever kind (of object or of the Self) depends
on the Self being Pure Knowledge.

Talk 205.
Mr. Cohen had been cogitating on the nature of the Heart, if the ‘spiritual
heart’ beats; if so, how; or if it does not beat, then how is it to be felt?
M.: This heart is different from the physical heart; beating is the
function of the latter. The former is the seat of spiritual experience.
That is all that can be said of it.
Just as a dynamo supplies motive power to whole systems of lights,
fans, etc., so the original Primal Force supplies energy to the beating
of the heart, respiration, etc.
D.: How is the ‘I-I’ consciousness felt?
M.: As an unbroken awareness of ‘I’. It is simply consciousness.
D.: Can we know it when it dawns?
M.: Yes, as consciousness. You are that even now. There will be no
mistaking it when it is pure.
D.: Why do we have such a place as the ‘Heart’ for meditation?
M.: Because you seek consciousness. Where can you find it? Can you
reach it externally? You have to find it internally. Therefore you are
directed inward. Again the ‘Heart’ is only the seat of consciousness
or the consciousness itself.
D.: On what should we meditate?
M.: Who is the meditator? Ask the question first. Remain as the
meditator. There is no need to meditate.
Talk 206.
Mr. B. C. Das, a Lecturer in Physics of Allahabad University, asked:
“Does not intellect rise and fall with the man?”
M.: Whose is the intellect? It is man’s. Intellect is only an instrument.
D.: Yes. Does it survive man’s death?
M.: Why think of death? See what happens in your sleep. What is
your experience there?
D.: But sleep is transient whereas death is not.
M.: Sleep is intermediate between two waking states, so also death
is between two successive births. Both are transient.

D.: I mean when the spirit is disembodied, does it carry the intellect
with it?
M.: Spirit is not disembodied. The bodies differ. It may not be a
gross body. It will then be a subtle body, as in sleep, dream or day-dream.
Intellect does not alter; the bodies may differ according to
circumstances.
D.: The spirit-body is the astral body then?
M.: The intellect is the astral body now.
D.: How can it be?
M.: Why not? You seem to think that the intellect cannot be limited
like a body. It is only an aggregate of certain factors. What else is
the astral body?
D.: But intellect is a sheath?
M.: Yes. Without intellect, no sheath is cognised. Who says that there
are five sheaths? Is it not the intellect that declares thus?
Talk 207.
Deep sleep is only the state of non-duality. Can the difference between
the individual and Universal souls persist there? Sleep implies
forgetfulness of all differences: This alone constitutes happiness. See
how carefully people prepare their beds to gain that happiness. Soft
cushions, pillows and all the rest are meant to induce sound sleep,
that is to say to end wakefulness. And yet the soft bed, etc., are of no
use in the state of deep sleep itself. The implication is that all efforts
are meant only to end ignorance. They have no use after realisation.
Talk 208.
It is enough that one surrenders oneself. Surrender is to give oneself
up to the original cause of one’s being. Do not delude yourself by
imagining such source to be some God outside you. One’s source is
within yourself. Give yourself up to it. That means that you should seek
the source and merge in it. Because you imagine yourself to be out of
it, you raise the question “Where is the source?” Some contend that the
sugar cannot taste its own sweetness and that a taster must taste and
enjoy it. Similarly, an individual cannot be the Supreme and enjoy the

Bliss of that state; therefore the individuality must be maintained on the
one hand and God-head on the other so that enjoyment may result! Is
God insentient like sugar? How can one surrender oneself and yet retain
one’s individuality for supreme enjoyment? Furthermore they say also
that the soul, reaching the divine region and remaining there, serves the
Supreme Being. Can the sound of the word “service” deceive the Lord?
Does He not know? Is He waiting for these people’s service? Would not
He - the Pure Consciousness - ask in turn: “Who are you apart from Me
that presume to serve Me?”
Still more, they assume that the individual soul becomes pure by being
divested of the ego and fit for being the body of the Lord. Thus the
Lord is the Spirit and the purified souls constitute His body and limbs!
Can there be a soul for the souls? How many souls are there? The
answer must be, “There are many individual souls and One Supreme
Soul.” What is soul in that case? It cannot be the body, etc. What
remains over after all these are eliminated must be said to be the soul.
Thus even after realising the soul as that which cannot be discarded,
the Supreme Soul must be known to exist. In that case, how was the
soul realised to be the ultimate reality after discarding all that was
alien to it? Should this be right, the soul which was described as that
inalienable reality is not the true soul. All such confusion is due to the
word ‘soul’ (atma). The same word atma is used to signify the body,
the senses, the mind, the vital principle, the individual soul and the
Supreme Being. This wide application of the word has given rise to
the idea that the individual soul (jivatma), goes to constitute the body
of the Supreme (Paramatma). “I, O Arjuna! am the Self, seated in the
heart of all beings; ...” (Bhagavad Gita, X-20). The stanza shows that
the Lord is the Atma (Self) of all beings. Does it say, “the Self of the
selves”? If, on the other hand, you merge in the Self there will be no
individuality left. You will become the Source itself. In that case what
is surrender? Who is to surrender what and to whom? This constitutes
devotion, wisdom, and investigation.
Among the Vaishnavites too, Saint Nammalvar says, “I was in a maze,
sticking to ‘I’ and ‘mine’; I wandered without knowing my Self. On
realising my Self I understand that I myself am You and that ‘mine’
(i.e., my possessions) is only You.”

Thus - you see - Devotion is nothing more than knowing oneself. The
school of Qualified Monism also admits it. Still, adhering to their
traditional doctrine, they persist in affirming that the individuals are
part of the Supreme - his limbs as it were. Their traditional doctrine
says also that the individual soul should be made pure and then
surrendered to the Supreme; then the ego is lost and one goes to the
regions of Vishnu after one’s death; then finally there is the enjoyment
of the Supreme (or the Infinite)!
To say that one is apart from the Primal Source is itself a pretension;
to add that one divested of the ego becomes pure and yet retains
individuality only to enjoy or serve the Supreme, is a deceitful
stratagem. What duplicity is this - first to appropriate what is really
His, and then pretend to experience or serve Him! Is not all this
already known to Him?

Talk 209.
19th June, 1936
Mr. B. C. Das, the Physics Lecturer, asked about free-will and destiny.
M.: Whose will is it? ‘It is mine’, you may say. You are beyond will
and fate. Abide as that and you transcend them both. That is the
meaning of conquering destiny by will. Fate can be conquered.
Fate is the result of past actions. By association with the wise the
bad tendencies are conquered. One’s experiences are then viewed
to their proper perspective.
I exist now. I am the enjoyer. I enjoy fruits of action. I was in the
past and shall be in the future. Who is this ‘I’? Finding this ‘I’ to
be pure Consciousness beyond action and enjoyment, freedom and
happiness are gained. There is then no effort, for the Self is perfect
and there remains nothing more to gain.
So long as there is individuality, one is the enjoyer and doer. But if
it is lost, the divine Will prevails and guides the course of events.
The individual is perceptible to others who cannot perceive divine
force. Restrictions and discipline are for other individuals and not
for the liberated.

Free-will is implied in the scriptural injunctions to be good. It
implies overcoming fate. It is done by wisdom. The fire of wisdom
consumes all actions. Wisdom is acquired by association with the
wise, or rather, its mental atmosphere.
Talk 210.
Man owes his movements to another Power, whereas he thinks that
he does everything himself - just like a lame man bluffing that, were
he helped to stand up, he would fight and chase away the enemy.
Action is impelled by desire; desire arises only after the rise of the
ego; and this ego owes its origin to a Higher Power on which its
existence depends. It cannot remain apart. Why then prattle, “I do,
I act, or I function”?
A Self-realised being cannot help benefiting the world. His very
existence is the highest good.
Talk 211.
Mr. B. C. Das, the Physics Lecturer, asked: “Yoga means union. I
wonder union of which with which.”
M.: Exactly. Yoga implies prior division and it means later union
of one with another. Who is to be united with whom? You are
the seeker, seeking union with something. That something is
apart from you. Your Self is intimate to you. You are aware of
the Self. Seek it and be it. That will expand as the Infinite. Then
there will be no question of yoga, etc. Whose is the separation
(viyoga)? Find it.
D.: Are the stones, etc. destined to be always so?
M.: Who sees stones? They are perceived by your senses, which are
in turn actuated by your mind. So they are in your mind. Whose
mind is it? The questioner must find it himself. If the Self be found
this question will not arise.
The Self is more intimate than the objects. Find the subject,
and the objects will take care of themselves. The objects are
seen by different persons according to their outlook and these
theories are evolved. But who is the seer, the cogniser of these

theories? It is you. Find your Self. Then there is an end of these
vagaries of the mind.
D.: What is this mind?
M.: A bundle of thoughts.
D.: Wherefrom has it its origin?
M.: Consciousness of the Self.
D.: Then thoughts are not real.
M.: They are not: the only reality is the Self.
Talk 212.
Maharshi observed: Pradakshina (the Hindu rite of going round the
object of worship) is “All is within me.” The true significance of the
act of going round Arunachala is said to be as effective as circuit round
the world. That means that the whole world is condensed into this Hill.
The circuit round the temple of Arunachala is equally good; and self-circuit
(i.e., turning round and round) is as good as the last. So all are
contained in the Self. Says the Ribhu Gita: “I remain fixed, whereas
innumerable universes becoming concepts within my mind, rotate
within me. This meditation is the highest circuit (pradakshina).”

Talk 213.
20th June, 1936
Mr. B. C. Das asked why the mind cannot be turned inward in spite
of repeated attempts.
M.: It is done by practice and dispassion and that succeeds only
gradually. The mind, having been so long a cow accustomed to
graze stealthily on others’ estates, is not easily confined to her
stall. However much her keeper tempts her with luscious grass
and fine fodder, she refuses the first time; then she takes a bit;
but her innate tendency to stray away asserts itself; and she slips
away; on being repeatedly tempted by the owner, she accustoms
herself to the stall; finally even if let loose she would not stray
away. Similarly with the mind. If once it finds its inner happiness
it will not wander outward.

Talk 214.
Mr. Eknatha Rao, a frequent visitor, asked: Are there not modulations
in contemplation according to circumstances?
M.: Yes. There are; at times there is illumination and then
contemplation is easy; at other times contemplation is impossible
even with repeated attempts. This is due to the working of the three
Gunas (qualities in nature).
D.: Is it influenced by one’s activities and circumstances?
M.: Those cannot influence it. It is the sense of doership - kartrutva
buddhi - that forms the impediment.

Talk 215.
22nd June, 1936
Maharshi was reading G. U. Pope’s translation of Tiruvachakam
and came across the stanzas describing the intense feeling of bhakti
as thrilling the whole frame, melting the flesh and bones, etc. He
remarked: “Manickavasagar is one of those whose body finally
resolved itself in a blazing light, without leaving a corpse behind.”
Another devotee asked how it could be.
Maharshi said the gross body is only the concrete form of the subtle
stuff - the mind. When the mind melts away and blazes forth as light,
the body is consumed in that process. Nandanar is another whose
body disappeared in blazing light.
Maj. Chadwick pointed out that Elisha disappeared in the same way.
He desired to know if the disappearance of Christ’s body from the
tomb was like that.
M.: No. Christ’s body was left as a corpse which was at first entombed,
whereas the others did not leave corpses behind.
In the course of conversation, Maharshi said that the subtle body is
composed of light and sound and the gross body is a concrete form
of the same.
The Lecturer in Physics asked if the same light and sound were
cognisable by senses.

M.: No. They are super-sensual. It is like this:
Isvara
(Universal)

Jiva
(Individual)

Gross

Universe

Body

Subtle

Sound and Light
- Nada, Bindu

Mind and
Prana

Primal

Atma (Self)
Param (transcendental)

Atma (Self)
Param (transcendental)

They are ultimately the same.
The subtle body of the Creator is the mystic sound Pranava, which
is sound and light. The universe resolves into sound and light and
then into transcendence - Param.
Talk 216.
Maharshi gave the meaning of Arunachala:
Aruna = Red, bright like fire.
The fire is not ordinary fire which is only hot.
This is Jnanagni (Fire of Wisdom) which is neither hot nor cool.
Achala = a hill.
So it means Hill of Wisdom.

Talk 217.
29th June, 1936
Mr. A. Bose, an engineer from Bombay, asked: Does Bhagavan feel
for us and show grace?
M.: You are neck-deep in water and yet cry for water. It is as good as
saying that one neck-deep in water feels thirsty, or a fish in water
feels thirsty, or that water feels thirsty.
D.: How may one destroy the mind?
M.: Is there a mind in the first place? What you call mind is an illusion.
It starts from the ‘I-thought’. Without the gross or subtle senses
you cannot be aware of the body or the mind. Still it is possible for

you to be without these senses. In such a state you are either asleep
or aware of the Self only. Awareness of Self is ever there. Remain
what you truly are and this question will not arise.
D.: Is the body consciousness an impediment to realization?
M.: We are always beyond the body or the mind. If however you feel
the body as the Self, then it is of course an impediment.
D.: Is the body or the mind of any use for the Self?
M.: Yes, inasmuch as it helps Self-realisation.

Talk 218.
30th June, 1936
Maharshi has been looking into the Siva Purana this day. He says:
Siva has the transcendental and immanent aspects as represented by
His invisible, transcendental being and the linga aspect respectively.
The linga originally manifested as Arunachala stands even to this
day. This manifestation was when the moon was in the constellation
of Orion (Ardra) in December. However it was first worshipped on
Sivaratri day which is held sacred even now.
In the sphere of speech Pranava (the mystic sound AUM) represents
the transcendental (nirguna) and the Panchakshari (the five-syllabled
mantra) represents the immanent aspect (saguna).
Again Sri Bhagavan recounts the anecdote of Parvati testing Rama.
The story is as follows:
Rama and Lakshmana were wandering in the forest in search of Sita.
Rama was grief-stricken. Just then Siva and Parvati happened to pass close
by. Siva saluted Rama and passed on. Parvati was surprised and asked
Siva to explain why He, the Lord of the Universe, being worshipped by
all, should stop to salute Rama, an ordinary human who having missed his
consort was grief-stricken and moving in anguish in the wilderness and
looking helpless. Siva then said: “Rama is simply acting as a human being
would under the circumstances. He is nevertheless the incarnation of
Vishnu, and deserves to be saluted. You may test him if you choose.”
Parvati considered the matter, took the shape of Sita and appeared in
front of Rama, as he was crying out the name of Sita in great anguish.

He looked at Parvati appearing as Sita, smiled and asked, “Why,
Parvati, are you here? Where is Sambhu? Why have you taken the
shape of Sita?” Parvati felt abashed and explained how she went there
to test him and sought an explanation for Siva saluting him.
Rama replied: “We are all only aspects of Siva, worshipping Him at
sight and remembering Him out of sight.”
Talk 219.
Ramakrishna Swami, a long-resident disciple, asked Maharshi the
meaning of Twaiyarunachala Sarvam, a stanza in The Five Hymns.
Maharshi explained it in detail, saying that the universe is like a painting on
a screen - the screen being the Red Hill, Arunachala. That which rises and
sinks is made up of what it rises from. The finality of the universe is the God
Arunachala. Meditating on Him or on the seer, the Self, there is a mental
vibration ‘I’ to which all are reduced. Tracing the source of ‘I’, the primal ‘I-I’
alone remains over, and it is inexpressible. The seat of Realisation is within
and the seeker cannot find it as an object outside him. That seat is bliss and is
the core of all beings. Hence it is called the Heart. The only useful purpose of
the present birth is to turn within and realise it. There is nothing else to do.
D.: How is annihilation of predispositions to be accomplished?
M.: You are in that condition in realisation.
D.: Does it mean that, holding on to the Self, the tendencies should
be scorched as they begin to emerge?
M.: They will themselves be scorched if only you remain as you
truly are.

Talk 220.
1st July, 1936
Mr. B. C. Das, the Physics Lecturer, asked: Contemplation is possible
only with control of mind and control can be accomplished only by
contemplation. Is it not a vicious circle?
M.: Yes, they are interdependent. They must go on side by side. Practice
and dispassion bring about the result gradually. Dispassion is
practised to check the mind from being projected outward; practice

is to keep it turned inward. There is a struggle between control and
contemplation. It is going on constantly within. Contemplation will
in due course be successful.
D.: How to begin? Your Grace is needed for it.
M.: Grace is always there. “Dispassion cannot be acquired, nor
realization of the Truth, nor inherence in the Self, in the absence
of Guru’s Grace,” the Master quoted.
Practice is necessary. It is like training a roguish bull confined
to his stall by tempting him with luscious grass and preventing
him from straying.
Then the Master read out a stanza from Tiruvachakam, which is
an address to the mind, saying: “O humming bee (namely, mind)!
Why do you take the pains of collecting tiny specks of honey from
innumerable flowers? There is one from whom you can have the
whole storehouse of honey by simply thinking or seeing or speaking
of Him. Get within and hum to Him (hrimkara).”
D.: Should one have a form in one’s mind, supplemented with reading
or chanting God’s name in one’s meditation?
M.: What is mental conception except it be meditation?
D.: Should the form be supplemented by repetition of mantras or
dwelling on divine attributes?
M.: When japa is the predominating tendency, vocal japa becomes
eventually mental, which is the same as meditation.
Talk 221.
Mr. Bose: A form means duality. Is that good?
M.: One who questions like that had better adopt the path of enquiry.
Form is not for him.
D.: In my meditation a blank interposes; I see no figure.
M.: Of course not.
D.: What about the blank?
M.: Who sees the blank? You must be there. There is consciousness
witnessing the blank.
D.: Does it mean that I must go deeper and deeper?
M.: Yes. There is no moment when you are not.

Talk 222.
2nd July, 1936
Dr. Popatlal Lohara, a visitor, has studied several books including “Upadesa
Sara” and visited several saints, sadhus and yogis, probably 1,500 as he
puts their number. A sadhu in Trimbak has told him that he has still
debts to pay which, if done, will enable him to have realisation. His only
debt, as he conceived it, was the marriage of his son. It has since been
performed and he now feels himself free from karmic indebtedness.
He therefore seeks Sri Bhagavan’s guidance for freedom from ‘mental
unhappiness’ which persists in spite of his not being indebted.
M.: Which text of “Upadesa Sara” did you read?
D.: The Sanskrit text.
M.: It contains the answer to your question.
D.: My mind cannot be made steady by any amount of effort. I have
been trying it since 1918.
The Master quoted from “Upadesa Sara”: “Merging the mind into
the Heart certainly comprises meritorious duty (karma), devotion
(bhakti), yoga and supreme wisdom (jnana).” That is the whole
truth in a nutshell.
D.: That does not satisfy my search for happiness. I am unable to
keep my mind steady.
The Master quoted again from the same book: “Continuous search for what
the mind is results in its disappearance. That is the straight path.”
D.: How to search for the mind then?
M.: The mind is only a bundle of thoughts. The thoughts have their
root in the ‘I-thought’. He quoted; “Whoever investigates the
origin of the ‘I-thought’, for him the ego perishes. This is the true
investigation.” The true “I” is then found shining by itself.
D.: This ‘I-thought’ rises from me. But I do not know the Self.
M.: All these are only mental concepts. You are now identifying
yourself with a wrong ‘I’, which is the ‘I-thought’. This ‘I-thought’
rises and sinks, whereas the true significance of ‘I’ is beyond both.
There cannot be a break in your being. You, who slept, are also now
awake. There was not unhappiness in your deep sleep. Whereas it

exists now. What is it that has happened now so that this difference
is experienced? There was no ‘I-thought’ in your sleep, whereas it is
present now. The true ‘I’ is not apparent and the false ‘I’ is parading
itself. This false ‘I’ is the obstacle to your right knowledge. Find
out wherefrom this false ‘I’ arises. Then it will disappear. You will
be only what you are - i.e., absolute Being.
D.: How to do it? I have not succeeded so far.
M.: Search for the source of the ‘I-thought’. That is all that one has to
do. The universe exists on account of the ‘I-thought’. If that ends
there is an end of misery also. The false ‘I’ will end only when its
source is sought.
Dr. Lohara asked for the meaning of one stanza in “Upadesa Sara”.
M.: The one then in sleep is also now awake. There was happiness
in sleep; but misery in wakefulness. There was no ‘I’- thought in
sleep; but it is now, while awake. The state of happiness and of no
‘I-thought’ in sleep is without effort. The aim should be to bring
about that state even now. That requires effort.
Sleep

Wakefulness

Effortless
No happiness
Happiness
‘I-thought’
No ‘I-thought’

Bring about sleep even in
the waking state and that is
realisation. Effort is directed
to extinguishing the ‘I-thought’
and not for ushering the true
‘I’. For the latter is eternal and
requires no effort on your part.

Talk 223.
Dr. Lohara: Why does the mind not sink into the Heart even while
meditating?
M.: A floating body does not readily sink unless some means are adopted
for making it do so. Breath-control makes the mind quiescent. The
mind must be alert and meditation pursued unremittingly even when
it is at peace. Then it sinks into the heart. Or the floating body might
be loaded with weights and made to sink. So also association with
the wise will make the mind sink into the Heart.

Such association is both mental and physical. The extremely
visible being (of the Guru) pushes the mind inward. He is also in
the heart of the seeker and so he draws the latter’s inward-bent
mind into the Heart.
This question is asked only when the man begins to meditate and finds it
difficult. Let him practise breath-control just a little and the mind will be
purified. It does not now sink into the heart because the latent tendencies
stand as obstacles. They are removed by breath-control or association
with the wise. In fact the mind is always in the Heart. But it is restive
and moves about on account of latent tendencies. When the tendencies
are made ineffective it will be restful and at peace.
By breath-control the mind will be only temporarily quiescent,
because the tendencies are still there. If the mind is transformed into
the Self it will no longer give trouble. That is done by meditation.
Talk 224.
A disciple asked how he could recognise his own natural primal condition.
M.: Absolute freedom from thoughts is the state conducive to such
recognition.
(From the attendant’s notes)
Talk 225.
When Sri Bhagavan and Rangaswami, an attendant, were on the rocks,
Bhagavan noticed someone in the Asramam rocking in a rocking chair,
and remarked to the attendant:
“Siva made over all His own possessions to Vishnu and wandered
away in the forests and wilderness and cemeteries and lived on food
begged by Him. In His view non-possession is higher in the scale of
happiness than possession of things.”
D.: What is that higher happiness?
M.: To be free from anxieties. Possessions create anxieties such as
their safeguarding, their utilisation, etc. Non-possession does not
bring any anxieties in its train. Therefore Siva resigned everything
in favour of Vishnu and He himself went away happy.
Divestment of possessions is the highest happiness.

Talk 226.
3rd July, 1936
A visitor from Tirukoilur asked if the study of the sacred books will
reveal the truth.
M.: That will not suffice.
D.: Why not?
M.: Samadhi alone can reveal it. Thoughts cast a veil over Reality
and so it cannot be clear in states other than Samadhi.
D.: Is there thought in Samadhi? Or is there not?
M.: There will only be the feeling ‘I am’ and no other thoughts.
D.: Is not ‘I am’ a thought?
M.: The egoless ‘I am’ is not thought. It is realisation. The meaning or
significance of ‘I’ is God. The experience of ‘I am’ is to Be Still.

Talk 227.
4th July, 1936
The Master observed: “Being of the nature of Bliss why does one
continue to crave for happiness? To be rid of that craving is itself
salvation. The Scriptures say, ‘You are That’. The imparting of that
knowledge is their purpose. The realisation must be by your finding
out who you are and abiding as That, i.e. your Self. To be repeating, ‘I
am that’ or ‘not this’ is only a waste of time. For the worthy disciple,
the work lies within himself and not without.”
As Bhagavan was descending the Hill, one of the workers, just
outside the Asramam stopped work and was about to prostrate
before the Master.
Then the Master said: “To engage in your duty is the true
prostration.”
The Master’s attendant asked: “How?”
M.: To perform one’s duty carefully is the greatest service to God.
(Then, smiling, he entered the hall.)

Talk 228.
At lunch a visitor from Nellore asked the Master for a tiny bit of food
(prasad) from His dish.
M.: Eat without thinking of the ego. Then what you eat becomes
Bhagavan’s prasad.
After lunch the Master continued humorously: “If I had given you
one morsel from my plate, each one would ask for a morsel too.
What will be left for me if I distribute the whole plate to others?
So you see that it is not devotion. There is no significance in eating
a morsel from my plate. Be a true devotee.”

Talk 229.
8th July, 1936
At 8 a.m. the pet squirrel was watching for an opportunity to run out.
The Master remarked. “All wish to rush out. There is no limit to going
out. Happiness lies within and not without.”

Talk 230.
20th July, 1936
A visitor: Can one realise the Truth by learning the scriptures and
study of books?
M.: No. So long as predispositions remain latent in the mind,
realisation cannot be achieved. Sastra learning is itself a vasana.
Realisation is only in samadhi.
Talk 231.
A visitor asked: ‘What is mouna (silence)?’
M.: Mouna is not closing the mouth. It is eternal speech.
D.: I do not understand.
M.: That state which transcends speech and thought is mouna.
D.: How to achieve it?
M.: Hold some concept firmly and trace it back. By such concentration
silence results. When practice becomes natural it will end in silence.

Meditation without mental activity is silence. Subjugation of the
mind is meditation. Deep meditation is eternal speech.
D.: How will worldly transaction go on if one observes silence?
M.: When women walk with water pots on their heads and chat with their
companions they remain very careful, their thoughts concentrated on
the loads on their heads. Similarly when a sage engages in activities,
these do not disturb him because his mind abides in Brahman.
Talk 232.
The Master said on another occasion: “Only the sage is a true
devotee.”
Talk 233.
D.: What is the result of “Rama Japa” (repetition of God Rama’s
name)?
M.: ‘Ra’ is Reality, ‘Ma’ is the mind; their union is the fruit of
“Rama Japa”. Utterance of words is not enough. The elimination
of thoughts is wisdom. It is the Absolute Existence.
Talk 234.
A Muslim visitor asked about asana (physical posture).
M.: Abidance in God is the only true posture.
Talk 235.
Mr. T. K. S. Iyer, a disciple, was excited because someone in the town
had spoken disparagingly of the Master. He did not retort and came
away excited. So he asked Master what penalty should be paid for
his failure to defend him.
M.: Patience, more patience; tolerance, more tolerance!
Talk 236.
On the death of King George V two devotees were discussing the
matter in the hall. They were very upset. The Master said to them.
“Whoever dies or is lost, what is that to you? Die yourself and lose
yourself, becoming one with love.”

Talk 237.
A man brought with him a silver idol of Subrahmanya and copper
idols of Valli and Devayanai. He said to Sri Bhagavan: “I have been
worshipping them for the last ten years but have been rewarded only
with calamities. What shall I do with them?
When I asked others, they attribute my worries to some fault in the
make-up of the idols - for instance, the difference in the metals of
their make. Is it so?”
M.: Did they say that it was wrong to worship?
Talk 238.
In answer to some question Maharshi said: “There is a state when
words cease and silence prevails.”
D.: How to communicate thought to each other?
M.: That is only when there is the notion of two.
D.: How to get peace?
M.: That is the natural state. The mind obstructs the innate peace.
Our investigation is only in the mind. Investigate the mind; it
will disappear.
There is no entity by name mind. Because of the emergence of
thoughts we surmise something from which they start. That we
term mind. When we probe to see what it is, there is nothing like
it. After it has vanished, Peace will be found to remain eternal.
D.: What is buddhi (intellect)?
M.: The thinking or discriminating faculty. These are mere names. Be
it the ego, the mind or the intellect, it is all the same. Whose mind?
Whose intellect? The ego’s. Is the ego real? No. We confound the
ego and call it intellect or mind.
D.: Emerson says, “Soul answers soul by itself - not by description
or words.”
M.: Quite so. However much you learn, there will be no bounds to
knowledge. You ignore the doubter but try to solve the doubts.
On the other hand, hold on to the doubter and the doubts will
disappear.

D.: Then the question resolves itself to knowing the Self.
M.: Quite so.
D.: How to know the Self?
M.: See what the Self is. What you consider to be the Self, is really
either the mind or the intellect or the ‘I-thought’. The other thoughts
arise only after the ‘I-thought’. So hold on to it. The others will
vanish leaving the Self as the residuum.
D.: The difficulty lies in reaching it.
M.: There is no reaching it at all because it is eternal, here and now.
If the Self were to be gained anew, it would not be permanent.
D.: How to obtain equanimity or peace or equilibrium of mind? What
is the best way?
M.: I have already answered it. Investigate the mind. It is eliminated
and you remain over. Let your standpoint become that of wisdom
then the world will be found to be God.
dristin jnanamayim kritva pasyet Brahmamayam jagat.
So the question is one of outlook. You pervade all. See yourself
and all are understood. But you have now lost hold of your Self
and go about doubting other things.
D.: How to know the Self?
M.: Are there two ‘I’s? How do you know your own existence?
Do you see yourself with these eyes? Question yourself. How
does this question arise? Do I remain to ask it or not? Can I find
my Self as in a mirror?
Because your outlook has been outward bent, it has lost sight
of the Self and your vision is external. The Self is not found in
external objects. Turn your look within and plunge down; you
will be the Self.
D.: Is discovery of the Self dependent on the observance of caste
rules? Or should we flout them?
M.: Not in the beginning. Observe them to start with. Caste-rules serve
as a check on the vagaries of the mind. It is thus purified.
D.: The unknowable can be attained only by the grace of the
unknowable.

M.: He helps the attainment. That is the Grace.
D.: How to check the mind?
M.: Will a thief betray himself? Will the mind find itself? The mind
cannot seek the mind. You have ignored what is real and are holding
on to the mind which is unreal and also trying to find what it is. Was
there mind in your sleep? It was not. It is now here. It is therefore
impermanent. Can the mind be found by you? The mind is not you.
You think you are the mind and therefore ask me how it is checked.
If it is there it can be checked. But it is not. Understand this truth by
search. Search for unreality is fruitless. Therefore seek the reality,
i.e., the Self. That is the way to rule over the mind. There is only
one thing Real!
D.: What is the one Real thing?
M.: That is what is: the others are only appearances. Diversity is
not its nature. We are reading the printed characters on paper but
ignore the paper which is the background. Similarly you are taken
up by the manifestations of the mind and let go the background.
Whose fault is it?
D.: Is there a limit to the Self?
M.: What is the Self?
D.: The Individual soul is the Self.
M.: What is the individual soul? Is there any difference between the
two or are they identical?
Any new appearances are bound to disappear. Anything created will
certainly be destroyed. The eternal is not born nor does it die. We
are now confounding appearances with reality. Appearance carries
its end in itself. What is it that appears newly? If you cannot find
it, surrender to the substratum of appearances unreservedly; then,
the reality will be left over as the residue.
D.: What happens to the man after death?
M.: Engage yourself in the living present. The future will take care
of itself. Do not worry about the future. The state before creation
and the process of creation are dealt with in the scriptures in order
that you may know the present. Because you say you are born,
therefore they say, yes, and add that God created you.

But do you see God or anything else in your sleep? If God be real
why does He not shine forth in your sleep also? You are always -
now the same as you were in sleep. You are not different from that
one in sleep. But why should there be difference in the feelings or
experiences of the two states?
Did you ask, while asleep, the question regarding your birth? or
where do I go after death? Why think of all these now in the wakeful
state? Let what is born think of its birth and the remedy, its cause
and ultimate results.
What is birth? Is it of the ‘I-thought’ or of the body? Is ‘I’ separate
from the body or identical with it? How did this ‘I-thought’ arise?
Is the ‘I-thought’ your nature or is anything else of your nature?
D.: Who is to ask these questions?
M.: Exactly - that is it. There is no end to it all.
D.: Are we then to keep quiet?
M.: Doubts cease to afflict when the confusion (moha) is
surpassed.
D.: Your statements amount to cessation of vichara - investigation.
M.: If atma-vichara (self-investigation), ceases, loka vichara
(world-investigation) takes its place. (Laughter in the hall).
Engage in Self-investigation, then the non-self will disappear. The
Self will be left over. This is self-investigation of the Self. The one
word Self is equivalent to the mind, body, man, individual. the
Supreme and all else.
Talk 239.
Mr. M. Frydman: One imagines things and enjoys them by strength
of imagination. Such creations are possible to Brahma the Creator.
Can the same statement apply to His creature, man?
M.: This is also your thought.
D.: Krishnamurti says that man should find out the ‘I’. Then ‘I’ dissolves
away, being only a bundle of circumstances. There is nothing behind
the ‘I’. His teaching seems to be very much like Buddha’s.
M.: Yes - yes, beyond expression.

Talk 240.

Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Volume II

23rd August, 1936
D.: The world is materialistic. What is the remedy for it?
M.: Materialistic or spiritual, it is according to your outlook.
Drishtim jnanamayim kritva, Brahma mayam pasyet jagat — Make your
outlook right. The Creator knows how to take care of His Creation.
D.: What is the best thing to do for ensuring the future?
M.: Take care of the present, the future will take care of itself.
D.: The future is the result of the present. So, what should I do to
make it good? Or should I keep still?
M.: Whose is the doubt? Who is it that wants a course of action?
Find the doubter. If you hold the doubter the doubts will disappear.
Having lost hold of the Self the thoughts afflict you; the world is
seen, doubts arise, also anxiety for the future.
Hold fast to the Self, these will disappear.
D.: How to do it?
M.: This question is relevant to matters of non-self, but not to the
Self. Do you doubt the existence of your own Self?
D.: No. But still, I want to know how the Self could be realised. Is
there any method leading to it?
M.: Make effort. Just as water is got by boring a well, so also you
realise the Self by investigation.
D.: Yes. But some find water readily and others with difficulty.
M.: But you already see the moisture on the surface. You are hazily aware
of the Self. Pursue it. When the effort ceases the Self shines forth.
D.: How to train the mind to look within?
M.: By practice. The mind is the intelligent phase leading to its own
destruction, for Self to manifest.

D.: How to destroy the mind?
M.: Water cannot be made dry water. Seek the Self; the mind will
be destroyed.

Talk 241.
29th August, 1936
D.: How to avoid misery?
M.: Has misery a shape? Misery is only unwanted thought. The mind
is not strong enough to resist it.
D.: How to gain such strength of mind?
M.: By worship of God.
D.: Meditation of the God of Immanence is hard to understand.
M.: Leave God alone. Hold your Self.
D.: How to do japa (repetition of mantras)?
M.: It is of two kinds - gross and subtle. The latter is meditation on
it, and it gives strength to the mind.
D.: But the mind does not get steady for meditation.
M.: It is due to lack of strength.
D.: Sandhya is usually done mechanically. Similarly other religious
duties. Is it useful? Is it not better to do japa, etc., knowing
their meanings?
M.: Um! Um!
Talk 242.
A Gujarati gentleman asked Sri Bhagavan: They say that choice
is offered to us to enjoy merits or demerits after our death. Their
succession will be according to our choice. Is it so?
M.: Why raise these questions relating to events after death?
Why ask “Was I born? Am I reaping fruits of my past karma,”
and so on? They will not be raised some time hence when
you fall asleep. Why? Are you now different from the one in
sleep? You are not. Why do these questions arise now and not
in sleep? Find out.

Talk 243.
A middle-aged, weak-looking man came with a walking stick in his hand,
placed it before Bhagavan, bowed low and sat near Maharshi. He got
up and with great humility offered the stick to Bhagavan, saying that it
was sandal-wood. Sri Bhagavan told him to keep it for himself. Because
nothing of Bhagavan’s can be safeguarded. Being common property but
coveted by some, it will be taken away by any visitor with or without
Bhagavan’s permission. Then the donor may be displeased.
But the man still humbly insisted. Sri Bhagavan could not resist his
supplications, and said, “Keep it yourself as prasad from Bhagavan.”
The man then requested that the stick might first be taken and then
given to him by Sri Bhagavan with blessings. Sri Bhagavan received
it, smelled it, said it was fine, nodded, and handed it back to the man,
saying, “Keep it. It will make you always remember me.”
Talk 244.
A Maharani Saheba spoke in a gentle and low voice, but quite audibly:
D.: “Maharajji, I have the good fortune to see you. My eyes have had the
pleasure of seeing you, my ears the pleasure of hearing your voice.
“I am blessed with everything that a human being would like to
have.” Her Highness’s voice choked. With great strength of mind
she rallied and proceeded slowly, “I have all that I want, a human
being would want …. But ... But ... I ... I ... do not have peace
of mind ... Something prevents it. Probably my destiny....”
There was silence for a few minutes. Then Maharshi in his usual
sweet manner spoke:
M.: “All right. What need be said has been said. Well. What is destiny?
There is no destiny. Surrender, and all will be well. Throw all the
responsibility on God. Do not bear the burden yourself. What can
destiny do to you then?”
D.: Surrender is impossible.
M.: Yes. Complete surrender is impossible in the beginning. Partial
surrender is certainly possible for all. In course of time that will
lead to complete surrender. Well, if surrender is impossible, what
can be done? There is no peace of mind. You are helpless to bring
it about. It can be done only by surrender.

D.: Partial surrender - well - can it undo destiny?
M.: Oh, yes! It can.
D.: Is not destiny due to past karma?
M.: If one is surrendered to God, God will look to it.
D.: This being God’s dispensation, how does God undo it?
M.: All are in Him only.
D.: How is God to be seen?
M.: Within. If the mind is turned inward God manifests as inner
consciousness.
D.: God is in all - in all the objects we see around us. They say we
should see God in all of them.
M.: God is in all and in the seer. Where else can God be seen? He
cannot be found outside. He should be felt within. To see the
objects, mind is necessary. To conceive God in them is a mental
operation. But that is not real. The consciousness within, purged
of the mind, is felt as God.
D.: There are, say, beautiful colours. It is a pleasure to watch them.
We can see God in them.
M.: They are all mental conceptions.
D.: There are more than colours. I mentioned colours only as an
example.
M.: They are also similarly mental.
D.: There is the body also - the senses and the mind. The soul makes
use of all these for knowing things.
M.: The objects or feelings or thoughts are all mental conceptions. The
mind rises after the rise of the I-thought or the ego. Wherefrom does
the ego rise? From the abstract consciousness or Pure intelligence.
D.: Is it the soul?
M.: Soul, mind or ego are mere words. There are no entities of the
kind. Consciousness is the only truth.
D.: Then that consciousness cannot give any pleasure.
M.: Its nature is Bliss. Bliss alone is. There is no enjoyer to enjoy pleasure.
Enjoyer and joy - both merge in it.

D.: There are pleasure and pain in ordinary life. Should we not remain
with only pleasure?
M.: Pleasure consists in turning and keeping the mind within; pain in
sending it outward. There is only pleasure. Absence of pleasure is
called pain. One’s nature is pleasure - Bliss (Ananda)
D.: Is it the soul?
M.: Soul and God are only mental conceptions.
D.: Is God only a mental conception?
M.: Yes. Do you think of God in sleep?
D.: But sleep is a state of dullness.
M.: If God be real He must remain always. You remain in sleep and
in wakefulness - just the same. If God be as true as your Self, God
must be in sleep as well as the Self. This thought of God arises
only in the wakeful state. Who thinks now?
D.: I think.
M.: Who is this ‘I’? Who says it? Is it the body?
D.: The body speaks.
M.: The body does not speak. If so, did it speak in sleep? Who is
this I?
D.: I within the body.
M.: Are you within the body or without?
D.: I am certainly within the body.
M.: Do you know it to be so in your sleep?
D.: I remain in my body in sleep also.
M.: Are you aware of being within the body in sleep?
D.: Sleep is a state of dullness.
M.: The fact is, you are neither within nor without. Sleep is the natural
state of being.
D.: Then sleep must be a better state than this.
M.: There is no superior or inferior state. In sleep, in dream and in the
wakeful state you are just the same. Sleep is a state of happiness;
there is no misery. The sense of want, of pain, etc., arises only in the

wakeful state. What is the change that has taken place? You are the
same in both, but there is difference in happiness. Why? Because the
mind has risen now. This mind rises after the ‘I-thought’. The thought
arises from consciousness. If one abides in it, one is always happy.
D.: The sleep state is the state when the mind is quiet. I consider it
a worse state.
M.: If that were so, why do all desire sleep?
D.: It is the body when tired that goes to sleep.
M.: Does the body sleep?
D.: Yes. It is the condition in which the wear and tear of the body is
repaired.
M.: Let it be so. But does the body itself sleep or wake up? You
yourself said shortly before that the mind is quiet in sleep. The
three states are of the mind.
D.: Are they not states of the soul functioning through the senses, etc.?
M.: They are not of the soul or of the body. The soul remains always
uncontaminated. It is the substratum running through all these three
states. Wakefulness passes off, I am; the dream state passes off, I
am; the sleep state passes off, I am. They repeat themselves, and yet
I am. They are like pictures moving on the screen in a cinema show.
They do not affect the screen. Similarly also, I remain unaffected
although these states pass off. If it is of the body, are you aware
of the body in sleep?
D.: No.
M.: Without knowing the body to be there how can the body be said
to be in sleep?
D.: Because it is still found after waking up.
M.: The sense of body is a thought; the thought is of the mind, the
mind rises after the ‘I-thought’, the ‘I-thought’ is the root thought.
If that is held, the other thoughts will disappear. There will then be
no body, no mind, not even the ego.
D.: What will remain then?
M.: The Self in its purity.
D.: How can the mind be made to vanish?

M.: No attempt is made to destroy it. To think or wish it is itself a
thought. If the thinker is sought, the thoughts will disappear.
D.: Will they disappear of themselves? It looks so difficult.
M.: They will disappear because they are unreal. The idea of difficulty
is itself an obstacle to realisation. It must be overcome. To remain
as the Self is not difficult.
D.: It looks easy to think of God in the external world, whereas it
looks difficult to remain without thoughts.
M.: That is absurd; to look at other things is easy and to look within
is difficult! It must be contrariwise.
D.: But I do not understand. It is difficult.
M.: This thought of difficulty is the chief obstacle. A little practice
will make you think differently.
D.: What is the practice?
M.: To find out the source of ‘I’.
D.: That was the state before one’s birth.
M.: Why should one think of birth and death? Are you really born? The
rising of the mind is called birth. After mind the body-thought arises and
the body is seen; then the thought of birth, the state before birth, death, the
state after death - all these are only of the mind. Whose is the birth?
D.: Am I not now born?
M.: So long as the body is considered, birth is real. But the body is
not ‘I’. The Self is not born nor does it die. There is nothing new.
The Sages see everything in and of the Self. There is no diversity
in it. Therefore there is neither birth nor death.
D.: If sleep be such a good state, why does not one like to be always
in it?
M.: One is always only in sleep. The present waking state is no
more than a dream. Dream can take place only in sleep. Sleep is
underlying these three states. Manifestation of these three states is
again a dream, which is in its turn another sleep. In this way these
states of dream and sleep are endless.
Similar to these states, birth and death also are dreams in a sleep.
Really speaking, there are no birth and death.

Talk 245.
8th September, 1936
Misses Gulbai and Shirinbai Byramjee, two Parsi ladies, were asking
questions round one central point. All their questions amounted to one.
“I understand that the Self is beyond the ego. My knowledge is theoretical
and not practical. How shall I gain practical realisation of the Self?”
M.: Realisation is nothing to be got afresh. It is already there. All that
is necessary is to be rid of the thought: “I have not realised.”
D.: Then one need not attempt it.
M.: No. Stillness of mind or peace is realisation. There is no moment
when the Self is not.
So long as there is doubt or the feeling of non-realisation, attempt
must be made to rid oneself of these thoughts.
The thoughts are due to identification of the Self with the non-self.
When the non-self disappears the Self alone remains. To make room
anywhere it is enough that things are removed from there. Room is
not brought in afresh. Nay, more - room is there even in cramping.
Absence of thoughts does not mean a blank. There must be one to
know the blank. Knowledge and ignorance are of the mind. They
are born of duality. But the Self is beyond knowledge and ignorance.
It is light itself. There is no necessity to see the Self with another
Self. There are no two selves. What is not Self is non-self. The
non-self cannot see the Self. The Self has no sight or hearing. It
lies beyond these - all alone, as pure consciousness.
A woman, with her necklace round her neck, imagines that it has
been lost and goes about searching for it, until she is reminded of it
by a friend; she has created her own sense of loss, her own anxiety of
search and then her own pleasure of recovery. Similarly the Self is all
along there, whether you search for it or not. Again just as the woman
feels as if the lost necklace has been regained, so also the removal of
ignorance and the cessation of false identification reveal the Self which
is always present - here and now. This is called realisation. It is not
new. It amounts to elimination of ignorance and nothing more.

Blankness is the evil result of searching the mind. The mind must
be cut off, root and branch. See who the thinker is, who the seeker
is. Abide as the thinker, the seeker. All thoughts will disappear.
D.: Then there will be the ego - the thinker.
M.: That ego is pure Ego purged of thoughts. It is the same as the Self.
So long as false identification persists doubts will persist, questions
will arise, there will be no end of them. Doubts will cease only
when the non-self is put an end to. That will result in realisation
of the Self. There will remain no other there to doubt or ask. All
these doubts should be solved within oneself. No amount of words
will satisfy. Hold the thinker. Only when the thinker is not held do
objects appear outside or doubts arise in the mind.
Talk 246.
Language is only a medium for communicating one’s thoughts to
another. It is called in only after thoughts arise; other thoughts arise
after the ‘I-thought’ rises; the ‘I-thought’ is the root of all conversation.
When one remains without thinking one understands another by means
of the universal language of silence.
Silence is ever-speaking; it is a perennial flow of language; it is interrupted
by speaking. These words obstruct that mute language. There is electricity
flowing in a wire. With resistance to its passage, it glows as a lamp or
revolves as a fan. In the wire it remains as electric energy. Similarly also,
silence is the eternal flow of language, obstructed by words.
What one fails to know by conversation extending to several years
can be known in a trice in Silence, or in front of Silence - e.g.,
Dakshinamurti, and his four disciples.
That is the highest and most effective language.
Talk 247.
There arose a doubt if ‘I-I’ consciousness be the same as nirvikalpa
samadhi or anything anterior to it.
Sri Bhagavan said that the tiny hole in the Heart remains always closed,
but it is opened by vichara with the result that ‘I-I’ consciousness
shines forth. It is the same as samadhi.

D.: What is the difference between fainting and sleep?
M.: Sleep is sudden and overpowers the person forcibly. A faint is
slower and there is a tingle of resistance kept up. Realisation is
possible in a faint and impossible in sleep.
D.: What is the state just before death?
M.: When a person gasps for breath it indicates that the person is
unconscious of this body; another body has been held and the
person swings to and fro. While gasping there is a more violent gasp
at intervals and that indicates the oscillation between the two bodies
due to the present attachment not having been completely snapped.
I noticed it in the case of my mother and of Palaniswami.
D.: Does the new body involved in that state represent the next reincarnation of the person?
M.: Yes. While gasping the person is in something like a dream, not
aware of the present environment.
(It must be remembered that Sri Bhagavan had been with His
mother from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. until she passed away. He was all
along holding her head with one hand, the other hand placed on
her bosom. What does it signify? He Himself said later that there
was a struggle between Himself and His mother until her spirit
reached the Heart.
Evidently the soul passes through a series of subtle experiences,
and Sri Bhagavan’s touch generates a current which turns the
soul back from its wandering into the Heart.
The samskaras, however, persist and a struggle is kept up between
the spiritual force set up by His touch and the innate samskaras,
until the latter are entirely destroyed and the soul is led into the
Heart to rest in eternal Peace, which is the same as Liberation.
Its entry into the Heart is signified by a peculiar sensation
perceptible to the Mahatma - similar to the tinkling of a bell.
When Maharshi attended on Palaniswami on his death-bed, He
took away His hand after the above signal. But Palaniswami’s eyes
opened immediately, signifying that the spirit had escaped through
them, thereby indicating a higher rebirth, but not Liberation.

Having once noticed it with Palaniswami, Maharshi continued
touching His mother for a few minutes longer - even after the
signal of the soul passing into the Heart - and thus ensured her
Liberation. This was confirmed by the look of perfect peace and
composure on her features).

Talk 248.
15th September, 1936
Sri Bhagavan said: The Jnani says, “I am the body”; The ajnani says,
“I am the body”; what is the difference? ‘I am’ is the truth. The body
is the limitation. The ajnani limits the ‘I’ to the body. ‘I’ remains
independent of the body in sleep. The same ‘I’ is now in the wakeful
state. Though imagined to be within the body, ‘I’ is without the body.
The wrong notion is not ‘I am the body.’ ‘I’ says so. The body is
insentient and cannot say so. The mistake lies in thinking that ‘I’ is
what ‘I’ is not. ‘I’ is not insentient. ‘I’ cannot be the inert body. The
body’s movements are confounded with ‘I’ and misery is the result.
Whether the body works or not, ‘I’ remains free and happy. The
ajnani’s ‘I’ is the body only. That is the whole error. The jnani’s ‘I’
includes the body and everything else. Clearly some intermediate
entity arises and gives rise to the confusion.
Mr. Vaidyanatha Iyer, a lawyer, asked: If the Jnani says “I am the
body,” what happens to him in death?
M.: He does not identify himself with the body even now.
D.: But you said just before that the Jnani says “I am the body.”
M.: Yes. His ‘I’ includes the body. For there cannot be anything apart
from ‘I’ for him. If the body falls away there is no loss for the ‘I’.
‘I’ remains the same. If the body feels dead let it raise the question.
Being inert it cannot. ‘I’ never dies and does not ask the question.
Who then dies? Who asks questions?
D.: For whom are all the sastras then? They cannot be for the real ‘I’.
They must be for the unreal ‘I’. The real one does not require them.
It is strange that the unreal should have so many sastras for him.
M.: Yes. Quite so. Death is only a thought and nothing more. He who
thinks raises troubles. Let the thinker tell us what happens to him in

death. The real ‘I’ is silent. One should not think ‘I am this - I am not
that’. To say ‘this or that’ is wrong. They are also limitations. Only
‘I am’ is the truth. Silence is ‘I’. If one thinks ‘I am this’, another
thinks ‘I am this’ and so on, there is a clash of thoughts and so many
religions are the result. The truth remains as it is, not affected by any
statements, conflicting or otherwise.
D.: What is death? Is it not the falling away of the body?
M.: Do you not desire it in sleep? What goes wrong then?
D.: But I know I shall wake up.
M.: Yes - thought again. There is the preceding thought ‘I shall wake
up’. Thoughts rule the life. Freedom from thoughts is one’s true
nature - Bliss.

Talk 249.
24th September, 1936
M.: Ignorance - ajnana - is of two kinds:
(1) Forgetfulness of the Self.
(2) Obstruction to the knowledge of the Self.
Aids are meant for eradicating thoughts; these thoughts are the
re-manifestations of predispositions remaining in seed-form; they
give rise to diversity from which all troubles arise. These aids are:
hearing the truth from the master (sravana), etc.
The effects of sravana may be immediate and the disciple realises
the truth all at once. This can happen only for the well-advanced
disciple.
Otherwise, the disciple feels that he is unable to realise the truth,
even after repeatedly hearing it. What is it due to? Impurities in
his mind: ignorance, doubt and wrong identity are the obstacles
to be removed.
(a) To remove ignorance completely, he has to hear the truth
repeatedly, until his knowledge of the subject-matter becomes
perfect;
(b) to remove doubts, he must reflect on what he has heard;
ultimately his knowledge will be free from doubts of any kind;

(c) to remove the wrong identity of the Self with the non-self (such
as the body, the senses, the mind or the intellect) his mind must
become one-pointed.
All these things accomplished, the obstacles are at an end and
samadhi results, that is, Peace reigns.
Some say that one should never cease to engage in hearing, reflection
and one-pointedness. These are not fulfilled by reading books, but
only by continued practice to keep the mind withdrawn.
The aspirant may be kritopasaka or akritopasaka. The former
is fit to realise the Self, even with the slightest stimulus: only
some little doubt stands in his way, it is easily removed if he
hears the truth once from the Master. Immediately he gains the
samadhi state. It is presumed that he had already completed
sravana, reflection, etc. in previous births, they are no more
necessary for him.
For the other all these aids are necessary; for him doubts crop up
even after repeated hearing; therefore he must not give up aids
until he gains the samadhi state.
Sravana removes the illusion of the Self being one with the
body, etc. Reflection makes it clear that Knowledge is Self.
One-pointedness reveals the Self as being Infinite and Blissful.

Talk 250.
27th September, 1936
A certain devotee asked Maharshi about some disagreeable statements
made by a certain man well-known to Maharshi.
He said, “I permit him to do so. I have permitted him already. Let
him do so even more. Let others follow suit. Only let them leave
me alone. If because of these reports no one comes to me, I shall
consider it a great service done to me. Moreover, if he cares to
publish books containing scandals of me, and if he makes money
by their sale, it is really good. Such books will sell even more
quickly and in larger numbers than others. Look at Miss Mayo’s
book. Why should he not also do it? He is doing me a very good
turn.” Saying so, He laughed.

29th September, 1936
There was again a reference to the same subject when Maharshi was
alone. The villifier seems to be getting into hot water on account of his
inconsiderate action. When it was mentioned, Maharshi seemed to be
concerned for the man’s safety, and He said with obvious sympathy:
“Even if allowed to have his own way for earning money, the man
gets into trouble. If he availed himself of our indulgence and acted
sensibly, he could have got on well. But what can we do?”
Talk 251.
An aristocratic lady looking very intelligent, though pensive, asked:
“We had heard of you, Maharajji, as the kindest and noblest soul. We
had long desired to have your darsan. I came here once before, on
the 14th of last month, but could not remain in your holy presence as
long as I wished. Being a woman and also young, I could not stand
the people around, and so broke away hurriedly after asking one or
two simple questions. There are no holy men like you in our part of
the country. I am happy as I have everything I want. But I do not have
that peace of mind which brings happiness. I now come here seeking
your blessing so that I may gain it.”
M.: Bhakti fulfils your desire.
D.: I want to know how I can gain that peace of mind. Kindly be
pleased to advise me.
M.: Yes - devotion and surrender.
D.: Am I worthy of being a devotee?
M.: Everyone can be a devotee. Spiritual fare is common to all and never
denied to anyone - be the person old or young, male or female.
D.: That is exactly what I am anxious to know. I am young and a
grihini (housewife). There are duties of grihastha dharma (the
household). Is devotion consistent with such a position?
M.: Certainly. What are you? You are not the body. You are Pure
Consciousness. Grihastha dharma and the world are only
phenomena appearing on that Pure Consciousness. It remains
unaffected. What prevents you from being your own Self?

D.: Yes I am already aware of the line of teaching of Maharshi. It
is the quest for the Self. But my doubt persists if such quest is
compatible with grihastha life.
M.: The Self is always there. It is you. There is nothing but you.
Nothing can be apart from you. The question of compatibility or
otherwise does not arise.
D.: I shall be more definite. Though a stranger, I am obliged to confess
the cause of my anxiety. I am blessed with children. A boy - a good
brahmachari - passed away in February. I was grief-stricken. I was
disgusted with this life. I want to devote myself to spiritual life.
But my duties as a grihini do not permit me to lead a retired life.
Hence my doubt.
M.: Retirement means abidance in the Self. Nothing more. It is not leaving
one set of surroundings and getting entangled in another set, nor even
leaving the concrete world and becoming involved in a mental world.
The birth of the son, his death, etc., are seen in the Self only.
Recall the state of sleep. Were you aware of anything happening? If
the son or the world be real, should they not be present with you in
sleep? You cannot deny your existence in sleep. Nor can you deny
you were happy then. You are the same person now speaking and
raising doubts. You are not happy, according to you. But you were
happy in sleep. What has transpired in the meantime that happiness
of sleep has broken down? It is the rise of ego. That is the new
arrival in the jagrat state. There was no ego in sleep. The birth of
the ego is called the birth of the person. There is no other kind of
birth. Whatever is born is bound to die. Kill the ego: there is no fear
of recurring death for what is once dead. The Self remains even
after the death of the ego. That is Bliss - that is Immortality.
D.: How is that to be done?
M.: See for whom these doubts exist. Who is the doubter? Who is
the thinker? That is the ego. Hold it. The other thoughts will die
away. The ego is left pure; see where from the ego arises. That is
pure consciousness.
D.: It seems difficult. May we proceed by bhakti marga?
M.: It is according to individual temperament and equipment. Bhakti
is the same as vichara.

D.: I mean meditation, etc.
M.: Yes. Meditation is on a form. That will drive away other thoughts.
The one thought of God will dominate others. That is concentration.
The object of meditation is thus the same as that of vichara.
D.: Do we not see God in concrete form?
M.: Yes. God is seen in the mind. The concrete form may be seen.
Still it is only in the devotee’s mind. The form and appearance of
God-manifestation are determined by the mind of the devotee. But
it is not the finality. There is the sense of duality.
It is like a dream-vision. After God is perceived, vichara commences.
That ends in Realisation of the Self. Vichara is the ultimate route.
Of course, a few find vichara practicable. Others find bhakti easier.
D.: Did not Mr. Brunton find you in London? Was it only a dream?
M.: Yes. He had the vision. He saw me in his mind.
D.: Did he not see this concrete form?
M.: Yes, still in his mind.
D.: How shall I reach the Self?
M.: There is no reaching the Self. If the Self were to be reached, it
would mean that the Self is not now and here, but that it should
be got anew. What is got afresh, will also be lost. So it will be
impermanent. What is not permanent is not worth striving for. So I
say, the Self is not reached. You are the Self. You are already That.
The fact is that you are ignorant of your blissful state. Ignorance
supervenes and draws a veil over the pure Bliss. Attempts are
directed only to remove this ignorance. This ignorance consists
in wrong knowledge. The wrong knowledge consists in the false
identification of the Self with the body, the mind, etc. This false
identity must go and there remains the Self.
D.: How is that to happen?
M.: By enquiry into the Self.
D.: It is difficult. Can I realise the Self, Maharaj? Kindly tell me. It
looks so difficult.
M.: You are already the Self. Therefore realisation is common to
everyone. Realisation knows no difference in the aspirants. This

very doubt, “Can I realise?” or the feeling, “I have not realised”
are the obstacles. Be free from these also.
D.: But there should be the experience. Unless I have the experience
how can I be free from these afflicting thoughts?
M.: These are also in the mind. They are there because you have
identified yourself with the body. If this false identity drops away,
ignorance vanishes and Truth is revealed.
D.: Yes, I feel it difficult. There are disciples of Bhagavan who have
had His Grace and realised without any considerable difficulty. I
too wish to have that Grace. Being a woman and living at a long
distance I cannot avail myself of Maharshi’s holy company as much
as I would wish and as often as I would. Possibly I may not be
able to return. I request Bhagavan’s Grace. When I am back in my
place, I want to remember Bhagavan. May Bhagavan be pleased
to grant my prayer!
M.: Where are you going? You are not going anywhere. Even
supposing you are the body, has your body come from Lucknow to
Tiruvannamalai? You had simply sat in the car and one conveyance
or another had moved; and finally you say that you have come here.
The fact is that you are not the body. The Self does not move. The
world moves in it. You are only what you are. There is no change
in you. So then even after what looks like departure from here, you
are here and there and everywhere. These scenes shift.
As for Grace - Grace is within you. If it is external it is useless. Grace
is the Self. You are never out of its operation. Grace is always there.
D.: I mean that when I remember your form, my mind should be
strengthened and that response should come from your side too. I should
not be left to my individual efforts which are after all only weak.
M.: Grace is the Self. I have already said, “If you remember Bhagavan,
you are prompted to do so by the Self.” Is not Grace already there?
Is there a moment when Grace is not operating in you? Your
remembrance is the forerunner of Grace. That is the response,
that is the stimulus, that is the Self and that is Grace.
There is no cause for anxiety.
D.: Can I engage in spiritual practice, even remaining in samsara?

M.: Yes, certainly. One ought to do so.
D.: Is not samsara a hindrance? Do not all the holy books advocate
renunciation?
M.: Samsara is only in your mind. The world does not speak out, saying
‘I am the world’. Otherwise, it must be ever there - not excluding your
sleep. Since it is not in sleep it is impermanent. Being impermanent
it has no stamina. Having no stamina it is easily subdued by the Self.
The Self alone is permanent. Renunciation is non-identification of
the Self with the non-self. On the disappearance of ignorance the
non-self ceases to exist. That is true renunciation.
D.: Why did you then leave your home in your youth?
M.: That is my prarabdha (fate). One’s course of conduct in this life
is determined by one’s prarabdha. My prarabdha is this way. Your
prarabdha is that way.
D.: Should I not also renounce?
M.: If that had been your prarabdha, the question would not have
arisen.
D.: I should therefore remain in the world and engage in spiritual
practice. Well, can I get realisation in this life?
M.: This has been already answered. You are always the Self. Earnest
efforts never fail. Success is bound to result.
D.: Will Maharshi be pleased to extend Grace to me also!
Maharshi smiled and said “Um! Um!” With blessings and salutation,
the interview came to a close and the party departed directly.

Talk 252.
30th September, 1936
D.: Sri Ramakrishna touched Vivekananda and the latter realised
Bliss. Is it possible?
M.: Sri Ramakrishna did not touch all for that purpose. He did not
create Atma. He did not create Realisation. Vivekananda was ripe.
He was anxious to realise. He must have completed the preliminary
course in his past births. Such is possible for ripe persons only.
D.: Can the same miracle be worked for all?

M.: If they are fit. Fitness is the point. A strong man controls the
weaker man. A strong mind controls the weaker mind. That was
what happened in the case cited. The effect was only temporary.
Why did Vivekananda not sit quiet? Why did he wander about after
such a miracle? Because the effect was only temporary.
D.: How is the mind to dive into the Heart?
M.: The mind now sees itself diversified as the universe. If the diversity
is not manifest it remains in its own essence, that is the Heart.
Entering the Heart means remaining without distractions.
The Heart is the only Reality. The mind is only a transient phase.
To remain as one’s Self is to enter the Heart.
Because a man identifies himself with the body he sees the world
separate from him. This wrong identification arises because he has lost
his moorings and has swerved from his original state. He is now advised
to give up all these false ideas, to trace back his source and remain as the
Self. In that state, there are no differences. No questions will arise.
All the sastras are meant only to make the man retrace his steps to
the original source. He need not gain anything new. He must only
give up his false ideas and useless accretions. Instead of doing it he
tries to catch hold of something strange and mysterious because he
believes that his happiness lies elsewhere. That is the mistake.
If one remains as the Self there is bliss. Probably he thinks that being
quiet does not bring about the state of bliss. That is due to his ignorance.
The only practice is to find out “to whom these questions arise.”
D.: How to control lust, anger, etc.?
M.: Whose are these passions? Find out. If you remain as the Self,
there will be found to be nothing apart from the Self. Then there
will be no need to control, etc.
D.: If a person whom we love dies, grief results. Shall we avoid such
grief by either loving all alike or by not loving at all?
M.: If one dies, it results in grief for the other who lives. The way to
get rid of grief is not to live. Kill the one who grieves. Who will
remain then to suffer? The ego must die. That is the only way.
The two alternatives amount to the same state. When all have become
the one Self, who is there to be loved or hated?

D.: What is the Sun marga? What is the Moon marga? Which of
them is easier?
M.: Ravi marga (Sun marga) is jnana. Moon marga is Yoga. They
think that after purifying the 72,000 nadis in the body, sushumna
is entered and the mind passes up to the sahasrara and there is
nectar trickling.
These are all mental concepts. The man is already overwhelmed
by world concepts. Other concepts are now added in the shape of
this Yoga. The object of all these is to rid the man of concepts and
to make him inhere as the pure Self - i.e., absolute consciousness,
bereft of thoughts! Why not go straight to it? Why add new
encumbrances to the already existing ones?

Talk 253.
1st October, 1936
Mr. F. G. Pearce, Principal, Scindia School, Gwalior: Bhagavan has stated
[in Sad Vidya Anubandham (Supplement) sloka 36]: “The illiterates are
certainly better off than the literates whose egos are not destroyed by the
quest of the self.” This being so, could Bhagavan advise a school master
(who feels this to be true) how to carry on education in such a way that
the desire for literacy and intellectual knowledge may not obscure the
more important search for the Self? Are the two incompatible? If they
are not, then from what age, and by what means, can young people best
be stimulated towards the search for the Real Truth within?
M.: Pride of learning and desire for appreciation are condemned
and not learning itself. Learning leading to search for Truth and
humility is good.
[A request from the same seeker: The above questioner has spent
two very precious days in physical proximity to Bhagavan Maharshi
(whom he has not seen since - 17 years ago - he visited Him for a few
minutes on the hillside). His duties now compel him to take his body far
away again to the north, and it may be years before he can return.
He humbly requests Bhagavan to make a strong link with him, and
to continue to help him with His grace, in the quest of the Self.
Maharshi had a gentle smile for this.]

Talk 254.
Mr. Duncan Greenlees quoted a few verses from Srimad Bhagavatam
to the following effect:
“See the Self in yourself like the pure ether in all beings, in and out.”
“Unashamed, fall prostrate before even an outcast, a cow or an ass.”
“So long as ‘I’ am not perceived in all, worship all with body
and mind.”
“With right knowledge see all as Brahma. This once clear, all doubts
are at an end and you will remain withdrawn in the Self.”
He then raised the following questions:
D.: Is this a True Path to the realisation of the, One Self? Is it not
easier for some thus to practise seeing Bhagavan in whatever meets
the mind than to seek the Super-Mental through the mental inquiry
“Who am I?”
M.: Yes. When you see God in all, do you think of God or do you not?
You should certainly keep God in your mind for seeing God all
round you. Keeping God in your mind becomes dhyana. Dhyana is
the stage before realisation. Realisation is in the Self only. Dhyana
must precede it. Whether you make dhyana of God or of Self, it is
immaterial. The goal is the same.
But you cannot escape the Self. You want to see God in all, but not
in yourself? If all are God, are you not included in that all? Yourself
being God, is it a wonder that all are God? There must be a seer
and thinker for even the practice. Who is he?
D.: Through poetry, music, japa, bhajan, beautiful landscapes, reading
the lives of spiritual heroes, etc., one sometimes experiences a true
sense of all-unity. Is that feeling of deep blissful quiet (wherein the
personal self has no place) the “entering into the heart” whereof
Bhagavan speaks? Will practice of that lead to a deeper samadhi,
and so ultimately to a full vision of the Real?
M.: Again, there is happiness at agreeable sights, etc. It is the
happiness inherent in the Self. That happiness is not alien and
after. You are diving into the Pure Self on occasions which you
consider pleasurable. That diving reveals the Self-existent Bliss.

But the association of ideas is responsible for foisting this bliss on
to other things or happenings. In fact, it is within you. On these
occasions you are plunging into the Self, though unconsciously.
If you do so consciously you call it Realisation. I want you to dive
consciously into the Self, i.e., into the Heart.
Talk 255.
D.: If the Self be always realised we should only keep still. Is that so?
M.: If you can keep still without engaging in any other pursuits, it is
very good. If that cannot be done, where is the use of being quiet
so far as realisation is concerned? So long as one is obliged to be
active, let him not give up the attempt to realise the Self.
Talk 256.
A question was asked regarding the position of one whose jnana is
weak in the scheme of things. The doubt was if that manda Jnani had
stopped short of kevala nirvikalpa.
M.: Kevala nirvikalpa happens even in the tanumanasi stage (of
attenuated mind).
D.: The middling and superior jnanis are said to be jivanmuktas.
Kevala nirvikalpa is in tanumanasa. Where does one whose jnana
is weak fit in?
M.: He comes in sattvapatti (realisation) - whereas the middling
and the superior ones come in asamsakti and padarthabhavini
respectively. This division as dull, middling, and superior is
according to the momentum of prarabdha. If it is strong he is
weak; if it is middling he is middling too; if prarabdha is weak he
is superior; if it is very weak he is in turyaga.
There is no difference in the samadhi state or the jnana of the jnanis.
The classification is only from the standpoint of the observer.
D.: Is tanumanasi the same as mumukshutva?
M.: No. The six qualities, discrimination, dispassion and mumukshutva,
etc., precede subhechcha. The first stage follows mumukshutva,
then comes vicharana (search), then the tenuous mind. Direct
perception is in sattvapatti (realisation).

There is no need to discuss similar points. Jivanmukti and Videhamukti
are differently described by different authorities; Videhamukti is
sometimes said to occur even when the man is seen with a body.
The fact is that mukti is another name for Aham (‘I’).
The Seven Jnana bhumikas (stages of knowledge) are: (1) Subhechcha
(desire for enlightenment); (2) Vicharana (hearing and reflection);
(3) Tanumanasi (tenuous mind); (4) Sattvapatti (Self-Realisation);
(5) Asamsakti (non-attachment); (6) Padarthabhavani (absolute
non-perception of objects); (7) Turyaga (beyond words).
Those who have attained the last four Bhumikas are respectively
called Brahmavit, Brahmavidvara, Brahmavidvarya and
Brahmavidvarishtha.
Talk 257.
D.: A certain young man from Dindigul spoke to Sri Bhagavan, saying
that he had learnt by his stay for a few days; that all that he need do
was to enquire, “Who am I?” He wanted to know if any discipline
was to be observed and started with the question: “Where should I
do the enquiry?” meaning if he should do it in Guru sannidhi (the
presence of the Master).
M.: The enquiry should be from where the ‘I’ is.
D.: People labour for gaining the summum bonum of life. I think that they
are not on the right track. Sri Bhagavan has made considerable tapas
and achieved the goal. Sri Bhagavan is also desirous that all should reach
the goal and willing to help them to that end. His vicarious tapas must
enable others to reach the goal rather easily. They need not undergo all
the hardships which Sri Bhagavan has already undergone. Their way
has been made easy for them by Sri Bhagavan. Am I not right?
Maharshi smiled and said: If that were so everyone would easily
reach the goal, but each one must work for himself.
Talk 258.
D.: A young man from Mysore gave a written slip to Sri Bhagavan
and waited for an answer. He had asked Sri Bhagavan to say
where other Mahatmas could be found whom he might approach
for guidance. He confessed that he had left his home without

informing his elders in order that he might seek God through
Mahatmas. True, he knew nothing of God or of search for Him.
Therefore he desired to see Mahatmas.
Sri Bhagavan simply returned the note saying: I must answer any
and every question. Unless I do so I am not great.
The boy tore away the slip and wrote another, which said, “You
are kind to squirrels and hares. You fondle them when they
struggle to run away from you. Yet you are indifferent to human
beings. For instance, I have left my home and am waiting here
for a fortnight. I have had no food some days. I am struggling.
Still you do not care for me.”
M.: Look here. I am not endowed with television. God has not
bestowed that gift on me. What shall I do? How can I answer your
questions? People call me Maharshi and treat me like this. But I
do not see myself as a Maharshi. On the other hand everyone is a
Maharshi to me. It is good that you in this early age are attempting
to seek God. Concentrate on Him. Do your work without desiring
the fruits thereof. That is all that you should do.
Talk 259.
Nada, Bindu and Kala correspond to prana, mind and intellect.
Isvara is beyond nada (sound).
Nada, jyoti (light), etc., are mentioned in Yoga literature. But God is
beyond these.
The circulation of blood, respiration of air, and other functions of
the body are bound to produce sound. That sound is involuntary and
continuous. That is nada.
Talk 260.
An extract from “A Hermit in the Himalayas” was found in the Sunday
Times. It related to recapitulation of past incarnations. In it Paul Brunton
has mentioned the Buddhist methods of gaining that faculty. Sri Bhagavan
said, “There is a class of people who want to know all about their future
or their past. They ignore the present. The load from the past forms the
present misery. The attempt to recall the past is mere waste of time.”

Talk 261.
There was a reference to reincarnation. Reincarnation of Shanti Devi
tallies with the human standards of time. Whereas the latest case
reported of a boy of seven is different. The boy is seven years now.
He recalls his past births. Enquiries go to show that the previous body
was given up 10 months ago.
The question arises how the matter stood for six years and two months
previous to the death of the former body. Did the soul occupy two
bodies at the same time?
Sri Bhagavan pointed out that the seven years is according to the
boy; ten months is according to the observer. The difference is
due to these two different upadhis. The boy’s experience extending
to seven years has been calculated by the observer to cover only 10
months of his own time.
Sri Bhagavan again referred to Lila’s story in Yoga Vasishta.
Talk 262.
Dr. Syed, a Muslim Professor, is now here. A sceptic friend of his
had confronted him with the question: “What miracle does your
Maharshi work?” He had replied that the ordinary people being no
better than animals are made men and that we being only His children
are endowed with strength by Maharshi. He desired to know if he
was right in replying to him. “Refreshing Peace within is the highest
miracle. Maharshi possesses it.”
“What is that to us?” the other man asked. I replied “The same
Peace is bestowed on all visitors to be shared by them. Mr. Paul
Brunton has mentioned it in his book. Everyone feels it every day
in Maharshi’s presence.”
The whole conversation was mentioned to Sri Bhagavan with the
following addition:
Parasurama has said that he felt some refreshing peace within when
he met Samvritta on the way. So he made him out to be a great saint.
Is not such peace the sole criterion of a Mahatma’s Presence? Is there
anything else?

Sri Bhagavan said: A Madhva saint Tatvaroyar had composed
a bharani on his master Swarupanand. Pandits objected to the
composition, saying that it was reserved to such as have killed more
than a thousand elephants in battle, whereas Swarupanand was an idle
man sitting somewhere unknown to people and he did not deserve
that panegyric.
Tatvaroyar asked them all to assemble before his master so that
they might see for themselves if he could slay one thousand
elephants at a time. They did so. As soon as they appeared they
were struck dumb and remained in beatific peace for a few days
without the least movement. When they regained their senses, they
saluted both the master and the disciple, saying that they were
more than satisfied. Swarupanand excelled the warriors in that he
could subdue the egos, which is a much more formidable task than
slaying a thousand elephants.
Maharshi said that the moral was clear. Peace is the sole criterion of
a Mahatma’s Presence.

Talk 263.
20th October, 1936
Dr. Syed: Sri Bhagavan says that the Heart is the Self. Psychology has
it that malice, envy, jealousy and all passions have their seat in the
heart. How are these two statements to be reconciled?
M.: The whole cosmos is contained in one pinhole in the Heart. These
passions are part of the cosmos. They are avidya (ignorance).
D.: How did avidya arise?
M.: Avidya is like Maya [she who is not is maya (illusion)]. Similarly
that which is not is ignorance. Therefore the question does not
arise. Nevertheless, the question is asked. Then ask, “Whose is the
avidya? Avidya is ignorance. It implies subject and object. Become
the subject and there will be no object.
D.: What is avidya?
M.: Ignorance of Self. Who is ignorant of the Self? The self must be
ignorant of Self. Are there two selves?

Talk 264.
D.: Does Bhagavan see the world as part and parcel of Himself? How
does He see the world?
M.: The Self alone is and nothing else. However, it is differentiated
owing to ignorance. Differentiation is threefold: (1) of the same
kind: (2) of a different kind, and (3) as parts in itself. The world is
not another self similar to the self. It is not different from the self;
nor is it part of the self.
D.: Is not the world reflected on the Self?
M.: For reflection there must be an object and an image. But the Self
does not admit of these differences.
D.: Does not then Bhagavan see the world?
M.: Whom do you mean by Bhagavan?
D.: A jiva advanced more than I.
M.: If you understand your jiva the other jiva is also understood.
D.: I do not want to discuss. I want to learn. Please instruct me.
M.: Because you desire to learn, discussion is unavoidable. Leave all this
aside. Consider your sleep. Are you then aware of bondage or do you
seek means for release? Are you then aware of the body itself? The sense
of bondage is associated with the body. Otherwise there is no bondage,
no material to bind with and no one to be bound. These appear, however,
in your wakeful state. Consider to whom they appear.
D.: To the mind.
M.: Watch the mind. You must stand aloof from it. You are not the
mind. And the Self will remain ever.
D.: Does Sri Bhagavan believe in evolution?
M.: Evolution must be from one state to another. When no differences
are admitted, how can evolution arise?
D.: Why does Sri Krishna say, “After several rebirths the seeker gains
knowledge and thus knows Me.” There must be evolution from
stage to stage.
M.: How does Bhagavad Gita begin?” Neither I was not nor you nor
these chiefs, etc.” “Neither it is born, nor does it die, etc.” So there is
no birth, no death, no present as you look at it. Reality was, is, and

will be. It is changeless. Later Arjuna asked Sri Krishna how he
could have lived before Aditya. Then Krishna, seeing Arjuna was
confounding Him with the gross body, spoke to him accordingly.
The instruction is for the one who sees diversity. In reality there
is no bondage nor mukti for himself or for others from the jnani’s
standpoint.
D.: Are all in liberation?
M.: Where is all? There is no liberation either. It could be only if
there was bondage. There was really no bondage and so, it follows,
there is no liberation.
D.: But to evolve through births, there must be practice, years of
abhyasa.
M.: Abhyasa is only to prevent any disturbance to the inherent
peace. There is no question of years. Prevent this thought at this
moment. You are only in your natural state whether you make
abhyasa or not.
Another man asked: Why do not all realise the Self in that case?
M.: It is the same question in another guise. Why do you raise this
question? Inasmuch as you raise this question of abhyasa it shows
you require abhyasa. Make it.
But to remain without questions or doubts is the natural state.
God created man; and man created God. They both are the
originators of forms and names only. In fact, neither God nor
man was created.

Talk 265.
21st October, 1936
The aristocratic lady again came after a few days, went straight to
Bhagavan, saluted him and said:
“I came last time with my husband and children. I was thinking of
their food and time was pressing. So I could not stay here as long as I
would have wished. But I was later worried over the hurried nature of
the visit. I have returned now to sit quiet and imbibe Sri Bhagavan’s
Grace. May He give me strength of mind!”

The hall was already kept clear of people. She sat on a crude
carpet in front of Sri Bhagavan. Sri Bhagavan said smiling: “Yes.
Silence is perpetual speaking. Ordinary speech hinders that heartto-heart talk.”
She agreed and sat quiet. Sri Bhagavan was sitting reclining on the
sofa. His eyes were fixed in her direction with a gracious smile on His
lips. Both remained silent and motionless for about an hour.
Prasad was distributed. The lady said: “Now I want to return. The
river between Bangalore and this place is in floods. On my way here
a bus was overturned in the floods. My car came later, and I saw the
sad accident. Still I was not afraid to ford the river. My car came out
safe. I would like to return in daytime.
“This time I shall not say ‘is the last time I shall come’ as I said on
former occasions. I do not know, but it may be so. Yet Maharshi should
give me strength of mind.
“I long for bhakti. I want more of this longing. Even realisation does
not matter for me. Let me be strong in my longing.”
M.: If the longing is there, Realisation will be forced on you even if
you do not want it. Subhechcha is the doorway for realisation.
D.: Let it be so. But I am content with longing. Even when I am away
from this place I must not relax in my devotion. May Sri Bhagavan
give me the necessary strength. Such longing could only be through
His Grace. I am personally too weak.
Again, when I was here on a previous occasion I asked several
questions. But I could not follow Sri Bhagavan’s answers. I
thought I would not ask any more questions but only sit quiet in
His Presence imbibing Grace which might be extended to me.
So I do not pursue Maharshi with more questions this time. Only
let me have His Grace.
M.: Your repeated visits to this place indicate the extension of Grace.
She was surprised and said: “I was going to ask Maharshi if He
called me. For all of a sudden my husband told me this morning:
‘There are two days free. If you want you may visit Maharshi
and return.’

“I was very agreeably surprised and pleased. I took it to be a call
from Maharshi.”
She also expressed a desire to reside near Maharshi and asked for
His blessings.
Maharshi said: A Higher Power is leading you. Be led by the same.
D.: But I am not aware of it. Please make me aware of it.
M.: The Higher Power knows what to do and how to do it. Trust it.
Talk 266.
The Muslim Professor asked: It is said that one should give up desire.
But there are the needs of the body which are irrepressible. What is
to be done?
M.: An aspirant must be equipped with three requisites: (1) Ichcha;
(2) Bhakti; and (3) Sraddha. Ichcha means satisfaction of bodily
wants without attachment to the body (such as hunger and thirst and
evacuation). Unless it is done meditation cannot progress. Bhakti
and Sraddha are already known.
D.: There are two kinds of desires - the baser and the nobler. Is it our
duty to transmute the baser one to the nobler?
M.: Yes.
D.: Well, Bhagavan, you said there are three requisites of which
ichcha is the satisfaction of natural wants without attachment to
the body, etc. I take food three or four times a day and attend to
bodily wants so much so that I am oppressed by the body. Is there
a state when I shall be disembodied so that I might be free from
the scourge of bodily wants?
M.: It is the attachments (raga, dwesha) which are injurious. The
action is not bad in itself. There is no harm in eating three or four
times. But only do not say, “I want this kind of food and not that
kind” and so on.
Moreover you take those meals in twelve hours of wakeful state whereas
you are not eating in the hours of sleep. Does sleep lead you to mukti?
It is wrong to suppose that simple inactivity leads one to mukti.
D.: There are said to be sadeha mukta (liberated in body) and videha
mukta (liberated without body).

M.: There is no liberation, and where are muktas?
D.: Do not Hindu sastras speak of mukti?
M.: Mukti is synonymous with the Self. Jivan mukti (liberation while
alive) and videha mukti (liberation after the body falls) are all for the
ignorant. The Jnani is not conscious of mukti or bandha (bondage).
Bondage, liberation and orders of mukti are all said for an ajnani
in order that ignorance might be shaken off. There is only mukti
and nothing else.
D.: It is all right from the standpoint of Bhagavan. But what about us?
M.: The difference ‘He’ and ‘I’ are the obstacles to jnana.
D.: But it cannot be denied that Bhagavan is of a high order whereas
we are limited. Will Bhagavan make me one with Him?
M.: Were you aware of limitations in your sleep?
D.: I cannot bring down the state of my sleep in the present state and
speak of it.
M.: You need not. These three states alternate before the unchanging
Self. You can remember your state of sleep. That is your real state.
There were no limitations then. After the rise of the ‘I-thought’ the
limitations arose.
D.: How to attain the Self?
M.: Self is not to be attained because you are the Self.
D.: Yes. There is an unchanging Self and a changing one in me. There
are two selves.
M.: The changefulness is mere thought. All thoughts arise after the
arising of the ‘I-thought’. See to whom the thoughts arise. Then
you transcend them and they subside. This is to say, tracing the
source of the ‘I-thought’, you realise the perfect ‘I-I’. ‘I’ is the
name of the Self.
D.: Shall I meditate on “I am Brahman” (Aham Brahmasmi)?
M.: The text is not meant for thinking “I am Brahman”. Aham (‘I’) is
known to everyone. Brahman abides as Aham in everyone. Find out
the ‘I’. The ‘I’ is already Brahman. You need not think so. Simply
find out the ‘I’.
D.: Is not discarding of the sheaths mentioned in the sastras?

M.: After the rise of the ‘I-thought’ there is the false identification
of the ‘I’ with the body, the senses, the mind, etc. ‘I’ is wrongly
associated with them and the true ‘I’ is lost sight of. In order to shift
the pure ‘I’ from the contaminated ‘I’ this discarding is mentioned.
But it does not mean exactly discarding of the non-self, but it means
the finding of the real Self.
The real Self is the Infinite ‘I-I’, i.e., ‘I’ is perfection. It is eternal.
It has no origin and no end. The other ‘I’ is born and also dies. It is
impermanent. See to whom are the changing thoughts. They will be
found to arise after the ‘I-thought’. Hold the ‘I-thought’. They subside.
Trace back the source of the ‘I-thought’. The Self alone will remain.
D.: It is difficult to follow. I understand the theory. But what is the
practice?
M.: The other methods are meant for those who cannot take to the
investigation of the Self. Even to repeat Aham Brahmasmi or think
of it, a doer is necessary. Who is it? It is ‘I’. Be that ‘I’. It is the
direct method. The other methods also will ultimately lead everyone
to this method of the investigation of the Self.
D.: I am aware of the ‘I’. Yet my troubles are not ended.
M.: This ‘I-thought’ is not pure. It is contaminated with the association
of the body and senses. See to whom the trouble is. It is to the ‘I-thought’.
Hold it. Then the other thoughts vanish.
D.: Yes. How to do it? That is the whole trouble.
M.: Think ‘I’ ‘I’ ‘I’ and hold to that one thought to the exclusion of
all others.

Talk 267.
23rd October, 1936
While speaking of the animal companions in the hall Sri Bhagavan
quoted a Tamil stanza by Avvai.
When the old lady was going along she heard on one occasion some
one praising Kambar. She replied with a stanza which means:
“Each is great in its own way. What is Kambar’s greatness when
compared with a bird which builds its nest so fine, the worms which

give lac, the honey bee which builds the comb, the ants which build
cities, and the spider its web?”
Bhagavan then began to describe their activities.
While living on the hill He had seen a hut built of stones and mud
and roofed with thatch. There was constant trouble with white ants.
The roof was pulled down and the walls demolished to get rid of the
mud which harboured the ants. Sri Bhagavan saw that the hollows
protected by stones were made into towns. These were skirted by walls
plastered black, and there were roads to neighbouring cities which
were also similarly skirted with black plastered walls. The roads were
indicated by these walls. The interior of the town contained holes in
which ants used to live. The whole wall was thus tenanted by white
ants which ravaged the roofing materials above.
Sri Bhagavan had also watched a spider making its web and described it. It
is seen in one place, then in another place, again in a third place. The fibre
is fixed at all these points. The spider moves along it, descends, ascends
and goes round and round and the web is finished. It is geometrical. The
net is spread out in the morning and rolled up in the evening.
Similarly the wasps build their nests of lac (crude), and so on.
So then, each animal has got some remarkable instinct. Kambar’s learning is
not to be wondered at because it is God’s will, as it is in the other cases.
Talk 268.
Dr. Syed: ,What is salvation? What did Christ mean by it?
M.: Salvation for whom? and from what?
D.: Salvation for the individual and from the sorrows and sufferings
of the world.
M.: Whose are the sorrows, etc.?
D.: Of the mind.
M.: Are you the mind?
D.: I shall now explain how this question arose. I was meditating. I
began to reflect on the Grace shown by Christ to some devotees who
got salvation. I consider that Sri Bhagavan is similar. Is not salvation
the result of similar Grace? That is what I mean by my questions.

M.: Yes. Right.
D.: The booklet Who am I? speaks of swarupa drishti (seeing the
essence). Then there must be a seer and the seen. How can this be
reconciled with the Ultimate Unity?
M.: Why do you ask for salvation, release from sorrow, etc.? He who
asks for them sees them also.
The fact is this. Drishti (sight) is consciousness. It forms the subject
and object. Can there be drishti apart from the Self? The Self is
all - drishti, etc.
D.: How to discern the ego from the Perfect ‘I-I’?
M.: That which rises and falls is the transient ‘I’. That which has
neither origin nor end is the permanent ‘I-I’ consciousness.
D.: Will continuous thought on the Self make the mind more and more
refined so that it will not think of anything but the highest?
M.: There is the peaceful mind which is the supreme. When the
same becomes restless, it is afflicted by thoughts. Mind is only
the dynamic power (sakti) of the Self.
D.: Are the sheaths material and different from the Self?
M.: There is no difference between matter and spirit. Modern science
admits that all matter is energy. Energy is power or force (sakti).
Therefore all are resolved in Siva and Sakti i.e., the Self and the
Mind.
The kosas are mere appearances. There is no reality in them as such.
D.: How many hours a day should one devote to meditation?
M.: Your very nature is meditation.
D.: It will be so when ripe, but not now.
M.: You become conscious of it later. That does not mean that your
nature is now different from meditation.
D.: What about practice?
M.: Meditation must always be practised.
D.: A Persian mystic says: “There is nothing but God.” The Quran
says: “God is immanent in all.”
M.: There is no ‘all’, apart from God, for Him to pervade. He alone is.

D.: Is it morally right for a man to renounce his household duties when
he once realises that his highest duty is Atma-chintana (continuous
thought on the Self)?
M.: This desire to renounce things is the obstacle. The Self is simple
renunciation. The Self has renounced all.
D.: It is true from Bhagavan’s standpoint. But for us .... my work
demands the best part of my time and energy; often I am too tired
to devote myself to Atma-chintana.
M.: The feeling “I work” is the hindrance. Enquire, “Who works?”
Remember, “Who am I?” The work will not bind you. It will go on
automatically. Make no effort either to work or to renounce work.
Your effort is the bondage. What is bound to happen will happen.
If you are destined to cease working, work cannot be had even if
you hunt for it. If you are destined to work you cannot leave it;
you will be forced to engage in it. So leave it to the Higher Power.
You cannot renounce or hold as you choose.
Talk 269.
D.: How is all-immanent God said to reside in daharakasa (Ether
of the Heart).
M.: Do we not reside in one place? Do you not say that you are in
your body? Similarly, God is said to reside in Hritpundarika (the
heart-lotus). The heart-lotus is not a place. Some name is mentioned
as the place of God because we think we are in the body. This kind
of instruction is meant for those who can appreciate only relative
knowledge.
Being immanent everywhere there is no particular place for God.
Because we think we are in the body we also believe that we are
born. However we do not think of the body, of God, or of method
of realisation in our deep slumber. Yet in our waking state we hold
on to the body and think we are in it.
The Supreme Being is that from which the body is born, in which
it lives and into which it resolves. We however think that we reside
within the body. Hence such instruction is given. The instruction
means: “Look within.”

Talk 270.
Mr. G. V. Subbaramiah, a lecturer in English in Nellore, asked:
Brahman is the one by whom all this is pervaded (yena sarvamidam
thatham). But then how does Sri Krishna specify the vibhutis in
Chapter X of Bhagavad Gita?
M.: The specifications are in reply to a definite question by Arjuna who
required to know the Lord’s vibhutis for convenience of worship
(upasana soukaryam). The fact is that God is all. There is nothing
apart from Him.
D.: The individual is said to give up decayed bodies (jirnani sarirani)
and to take up new ones (navani). Would the statement apply to
infant deaths also?
M.: You do not know, in the first place, what is jirnani and what is
navani. Secondly, jirna and nava are relative terms. What is old to
a king may be new to a beggar. The truth is that the individuality
signifies the state of embodiment till the time of liberation!
Talk 271.
Dr. Syed: How is Grace to be obtained?
M.: Similar to obtaining the Self.
D.: Practically, how is it to be for us?
M.: By self-surrender.
D.: Grace was said to be the Self. Should I then surrender to my own
Self?
M.: Yes. To the one from whom Grace is sought. God, Guru and Self
are only different forms of the same.
D.: Please explain, so that I may understand.
M.: So long as you think you are the individual you believe in God.
On worshipping God, God appears to you as Guru. On serving
Guru He manifests as the Self. This is the rationale.
Talk 272.
D.: There are widespread disasters spreading havoc in the world e.g.,
famine and pestilence. What is the cause of this state of affairs?
M.: To whom does all this appear?
D.: That won’t do. I see misery around.

M.: You were not aware of the world and its sufferings in your sleep;
you are conscious of them in your wakeful state. Continue in
that state in which you were not afflicted by these. That is to say,
when you are not aware of the world, its sufferings do not affect
you. When you remain as the Self, as in sleep, the world and its
sufferings will not affect you. Therefore look within. See the Self!
There will be an end of the world and its miseries.
D.: But that is selfishness.
M.: The world is not external. Because you identify yourself wrongly with
the body you see the world outside, and its pain becomes apparent to you.
But they are not real. Seek the reality and get rid of this unreal feeling.
D.: There are great men, public workers, who cannot solve the problem
of the misery of the world.
M.: They are ego-centred and therefore their inability. If they remained
in the Self they would be different.
D.: Why do not Mahatmas help?
M.: How do you know that they do not help? Public speeches, physical
activity and material help are all outweighed by the silence of
Mahatmas. They accomplish more than others.
D.: What is to be done by us for ameliorating the condition of the
world?
M.: If you remain free from pain, there will be no pain anywhere. The
trouble now is due to your seeing the world externally and also
thinking that there is pain there. But both the world and the pain
are within you. If you look within there will be no pain.
D.: God is perfect. Why did He create the world imperfect? The work
shares the nature of the author. But here it is not so.
M.: Who is it that raises the question?
D.: I - the individual.
M.: Are you apart from God that you ask this question?
So long as you consider yourself the body you see the world as
external. The imperfections appear to you. God is perfection. His
work also is perfection. But you see it as imperfection because of
your wrong identification.
D.: Why did the Self manifest as this miserable world?

M.: In order that you might seek it. Your eyes cannot see themselves. Place
a mirror before them and they see themselves. Similarly with the creation.
“See yourself first and then see the whole world as the Self.”
D.: So it amounts to this - that I should always look within.
M.: Yes.
D.: Should I not see the world at all?
M.: You are not instructed to shut your eyes from the world. You
are only to “see yourself first and then see the whole world as the
Self”. If you consider yourself as the body the world appears to be
external. If you are the Self the world appears as Brahman.
Talk 273.
Dr. Syed asked: I have been reading the Five Hymns. I find that the
hymns are addressed to Arunachala by you. You are an Advaitin. How
do you then address God as a separate Being?
M.: The devotee, God and the Hymns are all the Self.
D.: But you are addressing God. You are specifying this Arunachala
Hill as God.
M.: You can identify the Self with the body. Should not the devotee
identify the Self with Arunachala?
D.: If Arunachala be the Self why should it be specially picked out
among so many other hills? God is everywhere. Why do you specify
Him as Arunachala?
M.: What has attracted you from Allahabad to this place? What has
attracted all these people around?
D.: Sri Bhagavan.
M.: How was I attracted here? By Arunachala. The Power cannot be
denied. Again Arunachala is within and not without. The Self is
Arunachala.
D.: Several terms are used in the holy books - Atman, Paramatman,
Para, etc. What is the gradation in them?
M.: They mean the same to the user of the words. But they are understood
differently by persons according to their development.
D.: But why do they use so many words to mean the same thing?

M.: It is according to circumstances. They all mean the Self. Para means
‘not relative’ or ‘beyond the relative’, that is to say, the Absolute.
D.: Should I meditate on the right chest in order to meditate on the Heart?
M.: The Heart is not physical. Meditation should not be on the right
or the left. Meditation should be on the Self. Everyone knows ‘I
am’. Who is the ‘I’? It will be neither within nor without, neither
on the right nor on the left. ‘I am’ - that is all.
The Heart is the centre from which everything springs. Because
you see the world, the body and so on, it is said that there is a centre
for these, which is called the Heart. When you are in the Heart, the
Heart is known to be neither the centre nor the circumference. There
is nothing else. Whose centre could it be?
D.: May I take it that the Self and the non-Self are like substance
and its shadow?
M.: Substance and shadow are for the one who sees only the shadow
and mistakes it for the substance and sees its shadow also. But
there is neither substance nor shadow for the one who is aware
only of the Reality.
D.: Buddha, when asked if there is the ego, was silent; when asked if there
is no ego, he was silent; asked if there is God, he was silent; asked if there
is no God, he was silent. Silence was his answer for all these. Mahayana
and Hinayana schools have both misinterpreted his silence because
they say that he was an atheist. If he was an atheist, why should he
have spoken of nirvana, of births and deaths, of karma, reincarnations
and dharma? His interpreters are wrong. Is it not so?
M.: You are right.

Talk 274.
27th October, 1936
The Muslim Professor asked how Vaishnavism can be reconciled to
Advaitism.
M.: The Vaishnavites call themselves Visishtadvaitins. This is also
Advaita. Just as the individual body comprises the soul, the ego
and the gross body, so also God comprises Paramatma, the world
and the individuals.

D.: Does not bhakti imply duality?
M.: Swa swarupanusandhanam bhaktirityabhidheeyate (Reflection on
one’s own Self is called bhakti). Bhakti and Self-Enquiry are one and
the same. The Self of the Advaitins is the God of the bhaktas.
D.: Is there a spiritual hierarchy of all the original propounders of
religions watching the spiritual welfare of the humans?
M.: Let them be or let them not be. It is only a surmise at the best. Atma
is pratyaksha (self-evident). Know it and be done with speculation.
One may admit such a hierarchy; another may not. But no one can
gainsay the Atma.
D.: What does Sri Bhagavan think of Pravritti and nivritti margas?
M.: Yes. Both are mentioned. What of that?
D.: Which is the better of the two?
M.: If you see the Self - pure and simple - it is nivritti; if you see
the Self with the world, it is pravritti. In other words,
inward-turned mind (antarmukhi manas) is nivritti; outward-going mind
(bahirmukhi manas) is pravritti. Anyway, there is nothing apart
from the Self. Both are the same.
Similarly also, with the spiritual hierarchy; they cannot exist apart
from the Self. They are only in the Self and remain as the Self.
Realisation of the Self is the one Goal of all.

Talk 275.
5th November, 1936
In the course of conversation, someone referred to the fact that when Mr.
Brunton and a lady were walking home in the night, they saw a bright
glow on half the hill moving slowly and gently from North to South.
Sri Bhagavan said: This hill is said to be wisdom in visible shape.
D.: How is it visible to the physical eye?
M.: Sambandar had sung “The One who fascinated my heart or the
captivator of my heart, I sing of Him in my mind”. The Heart
is captivated: consequently the mind must have sunk into the
Heart; and yet there is the remembrance which enables the saint
to sing of God later.

Then the experience of a young disciple was mentioned. The
young man, educated and in good circumstances, in good health
and sober mind, was once facing Sri Bhagavan’s picture in his
home and meditating on the figure. The figure suddenly appeared
animated with life, which threw the young man into a spasm of
fear. He called out for his mother. His mother came and asked
him what the matter was. He was surrounded by his relatives who
were perplexed by his appearance. He was aware of their presence,
but was still overpowered by a mysterious force which he tried to
resist. He became unconscious for a short time. Fear seized him as
he regained consciousness. The people became anxious and tried
to bring him round with medicines.
When later he came to Tiruvannamalai he had some foreboding of
similar experience. The proximity of Sri Bhagavan prevented any
untoward happening. But whenever he wandered away from the hall
he found the force almost irresistible and himself in the grip of fear.
Sri Bhagavan said: “Is it so? No one told me this before.”
A devotee asked, if it was not saktipata (descent of divine power)?
M.: Yes it is. A madman clings to samskaras, whereas a Jnani does
not. That is the only difference between the two. Jnana is madness
of a kind.
D.: But saktipata is said to occur in karmasamya, i.e., when merit
and demerit are equal.
M.: Yes. Malaparipaka, karmasamya and saktipata mean the same,
A man is running the course of his samskaras; when taught he is
the Self, the teaching affects his mind and imagination runs riot.
He feels helpless before the onrushing power. His experiences are
only according to his imagination of the state “I am the Self”,
whatever he may conceive it to be. Saktipata alone confers the
true and right experience.
When the man is ripe for receiving the instruction and his mind is about
to sink into the Heart, the instruction imparted works in a flash and he
realises the Self all right. Otherwise, there is always the struggle.
Mano-nasa, jnana, and chittaikagrata (annihilation of the mind,
knowledge and one-pointedness) means the same.

Talk 276.
The U. P. lady arrived with her brother, a woman companion and a
burly bodyguard.
When she came into the hall she saluted Maharshi with great respect and
feeling, and sat down on a wool blanket in front of Sri Bhagavan. Sri
Bhagavan was then reading Trilinga in Telugu on the reincarnation of a
boy. The boy is now thirteen years old and reading in the Government
High School in a village near Lucknow. When he was three years he
used to dig here and there; when asked, he would say that he was trying
to recover something which he had hidden in the earth. When he was
four years old, a marriage function was celebrated in his home. When
leaving, the guests humorously remarked that they would return for this
boy’s marriage. But he turned round and said: “I am already married.
I have two wives.” When asked to point them out, he requested to be
taken to a certain village, and there he pointed to two women as his
wives. It is now learnt that a period of ten months elapsed between the
death of their husband and the birth of this boy.
When this was mentioned to the lady, she asked if it was possible to
know the after-death state of an individual.
Sri Bhagavan said, “some are born immediately after, others after some
lapse of time, a few are not reborn on this earth but eventually get salvation
in some higher region, and a very few get absolved here and now.”
She: I do not mean that. Is it possible to know the condition of an
individual after his death?
M.: It is possible. But why try to know it? All facts are only as true
as the seeker.
She: The birth of a person, his being and death are real to us.
M.: Because you have wrongly identified your own self with the body,
you think of the other one in terms of the body. Neither you are
nor the other is the body.
She: But from my own level of understanding I consider myself and
my son to be real.
M.: The birth of the ‘I-thought’ is one’s own birth, its death is the person’s
death. After the ‘I-thought’ has arisen the wrong identity with the body

arises. Thinking yourself the body, you give false values to others and
identify them with bodies. Just as your body has been born, grows
and will perish, so also you think the other was born, grew up and
died. Did you think of your son before his birth? The thought came
after his birth and persists even after his death. Inasmuch as you are
thinking of him he is your son. Where has he gone? He has gone to
the source from which he sprang. He is one with you. So long as you
are, he is there too. If you cease to identify yourself with the body, but
see the real Self, this confusion will vanish. You are eternal. The others
also will similarly be found to be eternal. Until this truth is realised
there will always be this grief due to false values arising from wrong
knowledge and wrong identity.
She: Let me have true knowledge by Sri Bhagavan’s Grace.
M.: Get rid of the ‘I-thought’. So long as ‘I’ is alive, there is grief. When
‘I’ ceases to exist, there is no grief. Consider the state of sleep!
She: Yes. But when I take to the ‘I-thought’, other thoughts arise and
disturb me.
M.: See whose thoughts they are. They will vanish. They have their
root in the single ‘I-thought’. Hold to it and they will disappear.
Again the Master pointed to the story of Punya and Papa in Yoga
Vasishta, V. Ch. 20, where Punya consoles Papa on the death of
their parents and turns him to realising the Self. Further, creation is
to be considered in its two aspects, Isvara srishti (God’s creation)
and jiva srishti (individual’s creation). Of these two, the universe
is the former, and its relation to the individual is the latter. It is
the latter which gives rise to pain and pleasure, irrespective of the
former. A story was mentioned from Panchadasi. There were two
young men in a village in South India. They went on a pilgrimage
to North India. One of them died. The survivor, who was earning
something, decided to return only after some months. In the
meantime he came across a wandering pilgrim whom he asked to
convey the information regarding himself and his dead companion
to the village in South India. The wandering pilgrim did so, but by
mistake changed the names. The result was that the dead man’s
parents rejoiced in his safety and the living one’s parents were in
grief. Thus, you see, pain or pleasure has no reference to facts but

to mental conceptions. Jiva Srishti is responsible for it. Kill the
jiva and there is no pain or pleasure but the mental bliss persists
forever. Killing the jiva is to abide in the Self.
She: I hear all this. It is beyond my grasp. I pray Sri Bhagavan to help
me to understand it all.
“I had been to a waterfall in Mysore. The cascade was a fascinating
sight. The waters streamed out in the shapes of fingers trying to
grasp the rocks but were rushed on by the current to the depths
below. I imagined this to be the state of the individuals clinging to
their present surroundings. But I cannot help clinging.
“I cannot imagine that we are no better than seasonal flowers,
fruits and leaves on trees. I love flowers but still this idea has no
hold on me.”
After a few minutes, she pointed out that she had intended to ask
Maharshi about death and matters relating to it but did not however
do it. Yet Maharshi was reading the related matter in the newspaper
and the same topic came up for enlightenment. She left after seeing
the cow Lakshmi.

Talk 277.
9th November, 1936
Mr. Cohen: What is will? I mean - where does it fit in, in the five
kosas?
M.: The ‘I-thought’ arises first and then all other thoughts. They
comprise the mind. The mind is the object and the ‘I’ is the
subject. Can there be will without the ‘I’? It is comprised in the
‘I’. The ‘I-thought’ is the vijnanamaya kosa (intellectual sheath).
Will is included in it.
Sri Bhagavan said further: Annamaya kosa is the gross body
sheath. The senses with the prana and the karmendriyas form the
pranamayakosa (sense-sheath). The senses with the mind form
the manomaya kosa (mind-sheath). They are the jnanendryas. The
mind is formed of thoughts only Idam (this) is the object and aham
(‘I’) is the subject; the two together form the vijnanamayakosa
(intellect-sheath).

Talk 278.
10th November, 1936
Miss W. Umadevi, a Polish lady, convert to Hinduism, had travelled in
Kashmir and brought views from Kashmir at which we were looking.
Sri Bhagavan humorously, remarked, “We have seen those places
without the trouble of travel.”
D.: I wish to go to Kailas.
M.: One can see these places only if destined. Not otherwise. After
seeing all, there will still remain more - if not in this hemisphere,
maybe in the other. Knowledge implies ignorance of what lies
beyond what is known. Knowledge is always limited.
After some time Sri Bhagavan continued: Appar was decrepit and
old and yet began to travel to Kailas.
Another old man appeared on the way and tried to dissuade him
from the attempt, saying that it was so difficult to reach there. Appar
was however obdurate and said that he would risk his life in the
attempt. The stranger asked him to dip himself in a tank close by.
Appar did so and found Kailas then and there.
Where did all this happen? In Tiruvayyar, nine miles from
Tanjore. Where is Kailas then? Is it within the mind or outside it?
If Tiruvayyar be truly Kailas, it must appear to others as well. But
Appar alone found it so.
Similarly it is said of other places of pilgrimage in the South, that they
are the abodes of Siva, and devotees found them so. This was true from
their standpoint. Everything is within. There is nothing without.
Talk 279.
D.: How long does it take a man to be reborn after death? Is it
immediately after death or some time after?
M.: You do not know what you were before birth, yet you want
to know what you will be after death. Do you know what you
are now?
Birth and rebirth pertain to the body. You are identifying the Self
with the body. It is a wrong identification. You believe that the

body has been born and will die, and confound the phenomena
relating to the one with the other. Know your real being and these
questions will not arise.
Birth and rebirth are mentioned only to make you investigate the
question and find out that there are neither births nor rebirths. They
relate to the body and not to the Self. Know the Self and be not
perturbed by doubts.
Talk 280.
D.: Can you help me to get rid of Maya?
M.: What is Maya?
D.: Attachment to the world.
M.: Was the world in your deep sleep? Was there attachment to it?
D.: There was not.
M.: Were you there or not?
D.: Maybe.
M.: Then do you deny having existed in sleep?
D.: I do not.
M.: You are therefore now “the same one as there was in sleep.”
D.: Yes.
Sleep

Wakefulness

No world
No attachment
The Self

World
Attachment
The Self

M.: What is it then that raises the question of Maya just now?
D.: The mind was not in sleep. The world and the attachment to it
are of the mind.
M.: That is it. The world and the attachment to it are of the mind,
not of the Self.
D.: I was ignorant in sleep.
M.: Who says that he was ignorant? Is he not ignorant now? Is he a
Jnani?

Ignorance is now mentioned by the contaminated Self here.
D.: Was the Self pure then in sleep?
M.: It did not raise any doubts. It did not feel imperfect or impure.
D.: Such Self is common to all, even in a dead body.
M.: But the man in sleep or in dead body does not raise questions.
Consider who raises questions. It is you. Were you not in sleep?
Why was there no imperfection?
The pure Self is simple Being. It does not associate itself with
objects and become conscious as in the wakeful state. What
you now call consciousness in the present state is associated
consciousness requiring brain, mind, body, etc., to depend upon.
But in sleep consciousness persisted without these.
D.: But I do not know the consciousness in sleep.
M.: Who is not aware of it? You admit “I am”. You admit “I was” in
sleep. The state of being is your self.
D.: Do you mean to say that sleep is Self-Realisation?
M.: It is the Self. Why do you talk of Realisation? Is there a moment
when the Self is not realised?
If there be such a moment, the other moment might be said to be
one of Realisation. There is no moment when the Self is not nor
when the Self is not realised. Why pick out sleep for it? Even now
you are Self-realised.
D.: But I do not understand.
M.: Because you are identifying the Self with the body. Give up the
wrong identity and the Self is revealed.
D.: But this does not answer my question to help me to get rid of
Maya, i.e., attachment.
M.: This attachment is not found in sleep. It is perceived and felt now.
It is not your real nature.
On whom is this accretion?
If the Real Nature is known these exist not. If you realise the Self
the possessions are not perceived. That is getting rid of Maya.
Maya is not objective, that it could be got rid of in any other way.

15th November, 1936
SPARKS FROM THE ANVIL — I
Talk 281.
A certain man, who claims to have been Sri Maharshi’s quondam
disciple, has filed a suit in the court praying for a declaration that he
is the legitimate Sarvadhikari of the Asramam.
Sri Maharshi was examined on Commission. There was a crowd but
the proceedings went on smoothly in the room on the North East.
The following are a few titbits therefrom: Sri Bhagavan’s answers
were quite spontaneous and smooth.
Q.: To which asramam does Sri Bhagavan belong?
M.: Atiasramam (beyond the four stages).
Q.: What is it?
M.: It is beyond the four commonly known asramas.
Q.: Is it sastraic?
M.: Yes. It is mentioned in the sastras.
Q.: Are there others of the same type besides yourself?
M.: There may be.
Q.: Have there been any?
M.: Suka, Rishabha, Jada Bharata and others.
Q.: You left home at an early age because you had no attachment for
home and property. But here, there is property in the Asramam.
How is it?
M.: I do not seek it. Property is thrust on me. I neither love nor hate it.
Q.: Are they given to you?
M.: They are given to the Swami, whoever he may be. But the body
is considered the Swami in the world. That body is this. It reduces
itself to myself.
Q.: In that case the attachment to property is now renewed. Is it so?
M.: I do not hate it - that is all I said.
Q.: In practical life it amounts to what I say.

M.: Just as we live and move in practical matters.
Q.: Do you give upadesh? Have you ever done it?
M.: Visitors ask questions. I answer them as well as I know. It is for
them to treat my words as they please.
Q.: Is it upadesh?
M.: How shall I say how others take it?
Q.: Have you disciples?
M.: I do not give upadesh in the ceremonial manner. For instance,
keeping a kumbha, making puja to it and whispering to the person.
The person may call himself my disciple or devotee. I do not consider
anyone to be my disciple. I have never sought upadesh from anyone
nor do I give ceremonial upadesh. If the people call themselves my
disciples I do not approve or disapprove. In my view all are alike.
They consider themselves fit for being called disciples. What can
I say to them? I do not call myself a disciple or a Guru.
Q.: How did you approve the building of Skandasramam on the Hill
which was temple-land, without previously obtaining permission
from the authorities?
M.: Guided by the same Power which made me come here and reside
on the Hill.
Q.: When you threw away your cash, etc., within an hour after
your arrival in this place, you did so because you did not desire
possessions. You never touch money. There were no possessions
for several years after your arrival here. How is it that donations
are now accepted by the Asramam?
M.: This practice grew up at a later stage because a few associates
began to use my name to collect funds. I did not approve of their
action nor check them. So it is going on. One man leaves, another
steps in, but the process goes on. I do not desire that contributions
should be accepted. But people do not heed that advice. I do not
desire to give ineffective advice. I do not therefore check them.
Since money comes in property grows spontaneously.
Q.: Why do you not sign your name?
M.: The author of Self-Realisation has furnished his answer for this
question. Moreover, by what name am I to be known? I myself do

not know. People have given me several names from time to time
since my arrival here. If I should sign by one name, all would not
understand it. So I used to say to the people seeking autographs
that, even if they should show my signature, people in general
would not believe it to be true.
Q.: You do not touch money nor other offerings, I trust.
M.: People sometimes place fruits in my hands. I touch them.
Q.: If you receive one kind of offering, why should you not receive
money also?
M.: I cannot eat money. What shall I do with it? Why should I take
that with which I do not know what to do?
Q.: Why do visitors stop at the Asramam?
M.: They must know why.
Q.: You have no objection to anyone coming and staying here, I suppose.
M.: No.
Q.: You have similarly no objection to any length of their stay.
M.: No. If I do not find it agreeable I will go away. That is all.
A lawyer devotee asked Sri Bhagavan if the previous day’s examination
by Commission caused much strain.
M.: I did not use my mind and so there was no strain. Let them examine
me for a thousand days. I don’t mind.

Talk 282.
16th November, 1936
D.: Does the Tantrik sadhana bring about Self-Realisation?
M.: Yes.
D.: Which worship in Tantra is the best?
M.: It depends on temperament.
D.: What part does Kundalini play in bringing about Self-Realisation?
M.: Kundalini rises from any lakshya that you have. Kundalini is
prana-sakti (life-current).
D.: Different deities are said to reside in different chakras. Does one
see them in course of sadhana?

M.: They can be seen if desired.
D.: Does the path to Self-Realisation go through samadhi?
M.: They are synonymous.
D.: It is said that the Guru can make his disciple realise the Self by
transmitting some of his own power to him? Is it true?
M.: Yes. The Guru does not bring about Self-Realisation. He simply
removes the obstacles to it. The Self is always realised.
D.: Is there absolute necessity of a Guru for Self-Realisation?
M.: So long as you seek Self-Realisation the Guru is necessary.
Guru is the Self. Take Guru to be the Real Self and your self as
the individual self.
The disappearance of this sense of duality is removal of ignorance.
So long as duality persists in you the Guru is necessary. Because
you identify yourself with the body you think the Guru, too, to be
some body. You are not the body, nor is the Guru. You are the Self
and so is the Guru.
This knowledge is gained by what you call Self-Realisation.
D.: How can one know whether a particular individual is competent
to be a Guru?
M.: By the peace of mind found in his presence and by the sense of
respect you feel for him.
D.: If the Guru happens to turn out incompetent, what will be the fate
of the disciple who has implicit faith in him?
M.: Each one according to his merits.
D.: What are your opinions about social reform?
M.: Self-reform automatically brings about social reform. Confine
yourself to self-reform. Social reform will take care of itself.
D.: What is your opinion about Gandhiji’s Harijan movement?
M.: Ask him.
D.: Is it necessary to take bath if we touch dead bodies?
M.: The body is a corpse. So long as one is in contact with it one must
bathe in the waters of the Self.
D.: If the advaita is final, why did Madhvacharya teach dvaita?

M.: Is your Self dvaita or advaita? All systems agree on Self-surrender.
Attain it first, then there will be time to judge whose
view is right or otherwise.
D.: Why do you not preach to the people to set them on the right
path?
M.: You have already decided by yourself that I do not preach. Do
you know who I am and what preaching is?
D.: Is the shaving of widows among Brahmins not cruel?
M.: This may be asked of Dharma Sastris or reformers. Reform
yourself first and let us then see about the rest.

Talk 283.
17th November, 1936
D.: How can one become jitasangadoshah (free from the stain of
association)?
M.: By satsanga (association with the wise).
“Satsangatve nissangatvam, nissangatve nirmohatvam, nirmohatve
nischalatatvam, nischalatatve jivanmuktih.”
Satsanga means sanga (association) with sat. Sat is only the Self.
Since the Self is not now understood to be Sat, the company of
the sage who has thus understood it is sought. That is Sat-sanga.
Introversion results. Then Sat is revealed.
For whom is association? For whom is dosha?
D.: To the Self.
M.: No. The Self is pure and unaffected. The impurities affect only
the ego.
D.: Can the soul remain without the body?
M.: It will be so a short time hence - in deep slumber. The Self is
bodiless. Even now it is so.
D.: Can a sanyasi remain in the midst of samsara?
M.: So long as one thinks that he is a sanyasi, he is not one, so long
as one does not think of samsara, he is not a samsari; on the other
hand he is a sanyasi.

18th November. 1936
Talk 284.
D.: It is said in Srimad Bhagavad Gita: “Realise the Self with pure
intellect and also by service to Guru and by enquiry.” How are
they to be reconciled?
M.: Iswaro Gururatmeti - Iswara, Guru and Self are identical. So long
as the sense of duality persists in you, you seek a Guru considering
that he stands apart. He however teaches you the truth and you
gain the insight.
D.: Kindly explain: ahameko name kaschit nahamanyasya kasyachit
naham pasyami yasyaham tam na pasyami yo mama (I am alone; none
is mine; of none else am I, I see none whose I am, none who is mine).
M.: This sloka occurs in different scriptures, holy books, e.g.,
Bhagavata, Maha Bharata, etc. It also forms the motto of Chapter
XI in Self-Realisation.
Aham - ‘I’, is only one. Egos are different. They are in the One Self.
The Self is not affected by the egos. ‘I’ is one only. ‘I’ is the Truth.
All that follows is meant to refute the sense of duality.
Talk 285.
D.: If the Self be itself aware, why am I not aware of the same, even
now?
M.: There is no duality. Your present knowledge is due to the ego and only
relating. Relative knowledge requires a subject and an object. Whereas
the awareness of the Self is absolute and requires no object.
Remembrance also is similarly relative, requiring an object to be
remembered and a subject to remember. When there is no duality,
who is to remember whom?
D.: What happens to the created ego when the body dies?
M.: Ego is ‘I-thought’. In its subtle form it remains a thought, whereas
in its gross aspect it embraces the mind, the senses and the body.
They disappear in deep slumber along with the ego. Still the Self
is there; similarly it will be in death.
Ego is not an entity independent of the Self in order that it must be
created or destroyed by itself. It functions as an instrument of the

Self and periodically ceases to function. That is to say, it appears
and disappears; this might be considered to be birth and death.
Relative knowledge pertains to the mind and not to the Self. It is
therefore illusory and not permanent. Take a scientist for instance.
He formulates a theory that the Earth is round and goes on to prove
it and establish it on an incontrovertible basis. When he falls asleep
the whole idea vanishes; his mind is left a blank; what does it matter
if the world remains round or flat when he is asleep? So you see
the futility of all such relative knowledge.
One should go beyond such relative knowledge and abide in the Self. Real
knowledge is such experience and not apprehension by the mind.
D.: Why does not Sri Bhagavan go about and preach the Truth to the
people at large?
M.: How do you know that I am not doing it? Does preaching consist
in mounting a platform and haranguing to the people around?
Preaching is simple communication of knowledge. It may be
done in Silence too.
What do you think of a man listening to a harangue for an hour and
going away without being impressed by it so as to change his life?
Compare him with another who sits in a holy presence and leaves
after some time with his outlook on life totally changed. Which
is better: To preach loudly without effect or to sit silently sending
forth intuitive forces to play on others?
Again how does speech arise? There is abstract knowledge
(unmanifest). From it there rises the ego which gives rise to thoughts
and words successively. So then:

Abstract Knowledge
Ego
Thoughts
Words
Words are therefore the great grandson of the original source. If
words can produce an effect, how much more powerful should the
preaching through silence be? Judge for yourself.

Talk 286.
D.: Why can we not remain in sushupti as long as we like and be also
voluntarily in it just as we are in the waking state?
M.: Sushupti continues in this state also. We are ever in sushupti. That
should be consciously gone into and realised in this very state.
There is no real going into or coming from it. Becoming aware of
that is samadhi. An ignorant man cannot remain long in sushupti
because he is forced by nature to emerge from it. His ego is not
dead and it will rise up again. But the wise man attempts to crush
it in its source. It rises up again and again for him too impelled by
nature, i.e., prarabdha. That is, both in Jnani and ajnani, ego is
sprouting forth, but with this difference, namely the ajnani’s ego
when it rises up is quite ignorant of its source, or he is not aware of
his sushupti in the dream and jagrat states; whereas a Jnani when
his ego rises up enjoys his transcendental experience with this ego
keeping his lakshya (aim) always on its source. This ego is not
dangerous: it is like the skeleton of a burnt rope: in this form it is
ineffective. By constantly keeping our aim on our source, our ego
is dissolved in its source. like a doll of salt in the ocean.
D.: Sri Ramakrishna says that nirvikalpa samadhi cannot last longer
than twenty-one days. If persisted in, the person dies. Is it so?
M.: When the prarabdha is exhausted the ego is completely dissolved
without leaving any trace behind. This is final liberation. Unless
prarabdha is completely exhausted the ego will be rising up in
its pure form even in jivanmuktas. I still doubt the statement of
the maximum duration of twenty-one days. It is said that people
cannot live if they fast thirty or forty days. But there are those who
have fasted longer, say a hundred days. It means that there is still
prarabdha for them.
D.: How is realisation made possible?
M.: There is the absolute Self from which a spark proceeds as from
fire. The spark is called the ego. In the case of an ignorant man
it identifies itself with an object simultaneously with its rise. It
cannot remain independent of such association with objects.
This association is ajnana or ignorance, whose destruction is
the objective of our efforts. If its objectifying tendency is killed

it remains pure, and also merges into the source. The wrong
identification with the body is dehatmabuddhi (‘I-am-the-body’
idea). This must go before good results follow.
D.: How to eradicate it?
M.: We exist in sushupti without being associated with the body and
mind. But in the other two states we are associated with them. If
one with the body, how can we exist without the body in sushupti?
We can separate ourselves from that which is external to us and not
from that which is one with us. Hence the ego is not one with the
body. This must be realised in the waking state. Avasthatraya (the
three states of waking, dream and deep sleep) should be studied
only for gaining this outlook.
The ego in its purity is experienced in intervals between two states
or two thoughts. Ego is like that caterpillar which leaves its hold
only after catching another. Its true nature can be found when it is
out of contact with objects or thoughts. Realise this interval with
the conviction gained by the study of avasthatraya (the three states
of consciousness).
D.: How do we go to sleep and how do we wake up?
M.: Just at nightfall the hen clucks and the chicks go and hide
themselves under her wings. The hen then goes to roost in the nest
with the chicks in her protection. At dawn the chicks come out and
so does the hen. The mother-hen stands for the ego which collects
all the thoughts and goes to sleep. At sunrise the rays emerge forth
and are collected again at sunset. Similarly, when the ego displays
itself, it does so with all its paraphernalia. When it sinks, everything
disappears with it.
D.: What does sushupti look like?
M.: In a cloudy dark night no individual identification of objects
is possible and there is only dense darkness, although the seer
has his eyes wide open; similarly in sushupti the seer is aware of
simple nescience.
Sri Bhagavan is said to have remarked to an inquisitive person: “What
is the meaning of this talk of truth and falsehood in the world which
is itself false?”

Talk 287.
27th November, 1936
A Punjabi gentleman, a doctor by profession, came here with his wife
to visit Sri Bhagavan. He was in the hall when Sri Bhagavan came
in after lunch; then he asked: “How should I meditate? I do not have
peace of mind.”
M.: Peace is our real nature. It need not be attained. Our thoughts
must be obliterated.
D.: I have been trying to obliterate them but I am not successful.
M.: The Gita method is the only one for it. Whenever mind strays
away bring it back to bear on meditation.
D.: I cannot bring my mind to meditate.
Another devotee: An elephant when free puts its trunk here and there
and feels restless. If a length of chain is given to it, the trunk holds it
and is no longer restless. Similarly, mind without an aim is restless,
with an aim it remains at peace.
D.: No, no, it is all theory. I have read many books. But no use. It is
practically impossible to make the mind concentrate.
M.: Concentration is impossible so long as there are predispositions.
They obstruct bhakti also.
The interpreter advised the questioner to study Who am I? The
doctor was ready with his protestations: “I have read it also. I
cannot still make my mind concentrate.”
M.: By practice and dispassion — abhyasa vairagyabhyam.
D.: Vairagya is necessary ...
M.: Abhyasa and vairagya are necessary. Vairagya is the absence of
diffused thoughts; abhyasa is concentration on one thought only. The
one is the positive and the other the negative aspect of meditation.
D.: I am not able to do so by myself. I am in search of a force to
help me.
M.: Yes, what is called Grace. Individually we are incapable because
the mind is weak. Grace is necessary. Sadhu seva is meant only for
it. There is however nothing new to get. Just as a weak man comes

under the control of a stronger one, the weak mind of a man comes
under control easily in the presence of the strong-minded sadhus.
That which is - is only Grace; there is nothing else.
The questioner said, “I request your blessings for the good of
myself”.
Bhagavan said: “Yes - yes.”
He left with his wife.

Talk 288.
29th November, 1936
Explaining Maya of Vedanta and swatantra of Pratyabhijna
(independence of recognition), Sri Bhagavan said:
The Vedantins say that Maya is the sakti of illusion premised in Siva.
Maya has no independent existence. Having brought out the illusion
of the world as real, she continues to play upon the ignorance of the
victims. When the reality of her not being is found, she disappears.
‘Recognition’ says that Sakti (power) is coeval with Siva. The one does
not exist without the other. Siva is unmanifest, whereas Sakti is manifest
on account of Her independent will swatantra. Her manifestation is the
display of the cosmos on pure consciousness, like images in a mirror.
The images cannot remain in the absence of a mirror.
So also the world cannot have an independent existence. Swatantra
becomes eventually an attribute of the Supreme. Sri Sankara says that
the Absolute is without attributes and that Maya is not and has no
real being. What is the difference between the two? Both agree that
the display is not real. The images of the mirror cannot in any way
be real. The world does not exist in reality (vastutah).
Both schools mean the same thing. Their ultimate aim is to realise
the Absolute Consciousness. The unreality of the cosmos is implied
in Recognition (Pratyabhijna), whereas it is explicit in Vedanta. If the
world be taken as chit (consciousness), it is always real. Vedanta says that
there is no nana (diversity), meaning that it is all the same Reality.
There is agreement on all points except in words and the method of
expression.

Talk 289.
30th November, 1936
While discussing Karma, Sri Bhagavan said: “Karma has its fruit
(phala). They are like cause and effect. The interrelation of a cause
and its effect is due to a Sakti whom we call God. God is phala data
(dispenser of fruit).
A visitor had been speaking of the Self having forgotten its true nature.
Sri Bhagavan after some time said: “People speak of memory and
oblivion of the Fullness of the Self. Oblivion and memory are only
thought-forms. They will alternate so long as there are thoughts. But
Reality lies beyond these. Memory or oblivion must be dependent on
something. That something must be foreign too; otherwise there cannot
be oblivion. It is called ‘I’ by everyone. When one looks for it, it is not
found because it is not real. Hence ‘I’ is synonymous with illusion or
ignorance (maya, avidya or ajnana). To know that there never was
ignorance is the goal of all the spiritual teachings. Ignorance must be
of one who is aware. Awareness is jnana. Jnana is eternal and natural.
Ajnana is unnatural and unreal.
D.: Having heard this truth, why does not one remain content?
M.: Because samskaras have not been destroyed. Unless the
samskaras cease to exist, there will always be doubt and confusion
(sandeha, viparita). All efforts are directed to destroying doubt
and confusion. To do so their roots must be cut. Their roots are the
samskaras. These are rendered ineffective by practice as prescribed
by the Guru. The Guru leaves it to the seeker to do this much so
that he might himself find out that there is no ignorance. This truth
mentioned is in the stage of the hearing of the Truth (sravana). That
is not drdha (firm). For making it unshaken, one has to practise
reflection (manana) and one-pointedness (nididhyasana). These
two processes scorch the seeds of vasanas so that they are rendered
ineffective.
Some extraordinary persons get drdha jnana (unshaken knowledge)
even on hearing the Truth only once (sakrchhravana matrena).
Because they are krthopasakah (advanced seekers), whereas the

akrthopasakah (raw seekers) take longer to gain drdha jnana
(unshaken knowledge). People ask: “How did ignorance (avidya)
arise at all?” We have to say to them: “Ignorance never arose. It has
no real being. That which is, is only vidya (knowledge).”
D.: Why then do I not realise it?
M.: Because of the samskaras. However, find out who does not realise
and what he does not realise. Then it will be clear that there is no
avidya (ignorance).
Talk 290.
Mr. Sagarmull, a Marwari gentleman, a cotton merchant from
Bombay, seems learned in Srimad Bhagavad Gita. He asked:
Srimad Bhagavad Gita says: mattah parataram nanyat kinchit and
later on sutre manigana iva - “there is nothing different from Me”
and later on “like beads strung on a thread.” If there is nothing but Sri
Krishna, how can the world be said to be like “beads on a string?”
M.: It means that the sutra (string) and the mani (jewel beads) are not
apart from ME. There are no maniganah (row of beads) apart from
the string (sutra) and no string apart from Me. The sloka emphasises
unity and not multiplicity which is only on the surface.
D.: Unity can only be after merging into Bhagavan. True - but till
then there must be diversity. That is samsara.
M.: Where are we now? Are we apart from Bhagavan? The samsara
and we are all in Bhagavan.
D.: But that is the experience of the jnanis. Differentiation persists
until jnana dawns. So there is samsara for me.
M.: Samskara (predisposition) is samsara (cycle of births and
deaths).
D.: Right. “All this is Vasudeva” - this truth has been forgotten by us.
So we cannot identify ourselves with God.
M.: Where is forgetfulness?
D.: Like svapna.
M.: Whose svapna?
D.: Jiva’s.

M.: Who is jiva?
D.: It is Paramatma’s.
M.: Let Paramatma ask then.
D.: I shall make my doubt clear by means of an illustration.
M.: Whoever wants the doubt to be illustrated and made clear? Direct
experience - pratyaksha - does not require examples for elucidation.
D.: There is pratyaksha and also forgetfulness.
M.: What is forgotten and by whom?
D.: Listen. One dreams; the dream-world disappears on waking.
M.: Wake up similarly from the present dream.
D.: Prakrti (nature) is too powerful.
M.: See the Purusha (lord) also. What can prakrti do then?
D.: There is a granthi (knot) between them.
M.: Whose is that knot? Is it of the Lord or of Nature? or of both?
D.: Due to Brahman.
M.: Then Brahman must ask or must be asked. To whom is svapna?
or the knot? You are always saying “I ask.” Who is that ‘I’?
D.: I do not perceive.
M.: ‘I’ is eternal. It would vanish if it were anything particular. It is
Perfection. So it is not found as an object.
D.: But I am imperfect.
M.: Why bring in imperfection? Why are you not perfect? Did you
feel imperfection in your sleep? Why do you not remain so even
now? Bring sleep into the waking state (jagrat sushupti) and you
will be all right. Ya nisa sarva bhootanam ... pasyato muneh ...
(That which is night for the ignorant is day for the wise).
D.: Yes, if he is a muni (sage).
M.: Who is a muni? Is he not a man?
D.: Do you not feel a slap if given to you? Is there no differentiation?
Is it jnana?
M.: A man under chloroform or under the influence of drink does not
feel it. Is he a Jnani? Is jnana inconsistent with that feeling?

D.: There is seer, seen and sight. They are not characteristic of jnana.
M.: In sleep, in trance, in absent-mindedness, there is no differentiation.
Do you call it jnana? What has happened in these states? Is that which
then was, absent now? That which is exists for ever. The difference is
due to the mind. The mind is sometimes present at other times absent.
There is no change in the Reality. Reality is always Bliss - Ananda.
D.: Bliss is the outcome of practice. What is that practice?
M.: Sadhana is the enquiry to find out to whom all these doubts
arise.
D.: It is for the ego (ahamkara).
M.: Wherefrom does ahamkara arise?
D.: Guidance is necessary to show me the way.
M.: Go within and find the route. You cannot find it from without;
nor should you seek it externally.
D.: I am unable to find the ego by search. I stop there.
M.: How can you get it? It is not apart from you. Leave alone not
finding it. Where are you now? Do you mean to say “I am not”?
D.: What or how am I?
M.: Do not trouble yourself about it. Let it be as it is. Why do you
care? Did you care for the whole or part (samashti, vyashti) in your
sleep? The same person is present now too. You are the same in
sleep and in waking.
D.: Sleep and waking are different states having different effects ....
M.: How does it matter to you? The Self is the same, all through.
D.: The mind is not steady in meditation.
M.: Whenever it wanders, turn it inward again and again.
D.: When duhka (misery) overpowers me, enquiry is impossible.
M.: Because the mind is too weak. Make it strong.
D.: By what means?
M.: Sat-sanga, Isvara Aradhana, Pranayama - (association with the
wise, worship of God, breath control).
D.: What happens?

M.: Misery is removed; our aim is removal of misery. You do not acquire
happiness. Your very nature is happiness. Bliss is not newly earned.
All that is done is to remove unhappiness. These methods do it.
D.: Association with the wise may strengthen the mind. There must
also be practice. What practice should be made?
M.: Yes. Practice is necessary too. Practice means removal of
predispositions. Practice is not for any fresh gain; it is to kill the
predispositions.
D.: Abhyasa (practice) should give me that power.
M.: Practice is power. If thoughts are reduced to a single thought the
mind is said to have grown strong. When practice remains unshaken
it becomes sahaja (natural).
D.: What is such practice?
M.: Enquiring into the Self. That is all. Atmanyeva vasam nayet .....
Fix the mind on the SELF.
D.: What is the aim to be kept in view? Practice requires an aim.
M.: Atman is the aim. What else can there be? All other aims are for
those who are incapable of atmalakshya (having the Self for the aim).
They lead you ultimately to atma-vichara (enquiry into the Self).
One-pointedness is the fruit of all kinds of practice. One may get it quickly;
another after a long time. Everything depends on the practice.
D.: Peace is extolled more than anything else. How shall we gain
it?
M.: It is your very nature. Forgetfulness never overtakes the Self. The
Self is now confounded with non-self and that makes you speak of
forgetfulness of the Self, Peace, etc. Oblivion will never rear up
its head if this confusion is put an end to.
D.: How is that done?
M.: Enquiry into the Self. One-pointedness means cessation of mental
activities. Forgetfulness must be for the self - well, of what? Of the
Self? Are there then two selves? Practice removes the samskaras.
D.: But samskaras are infinite and eternal - from beginningless time.
M.: This itself is a samskara. Give up that idea and all samskaras will
disappear at once. That is visranti (repose), santi (peace). Peace is

ever present. But you hold it down and rise over it and thus disturb
it. Then you say, “I want Peace”.
D.: Will Peace be gradual?
M.: Yes. Make the mind gradually still (Sanaissanaih uparamet) says
the Bhagavad Gita.
After some time, the visitor asked if one Mr. G. had been here on or
about the 20th instant. He himself had heard of Maharshi from him.
Mr. G. was full of joy after his visit here.
M.: How can I know the names of all the visitors? He might have
been here. All are full of joy. There is no name, no form .… Name
is however needed for vyavahara (empirical life).

5th December, 1936
SPARKS FROM THE ANVIL - II
Talk 291.
Question: You spoke of atyasrama (beyond the asramas — beyond
the orders of life) the other day. Is there any authority for it? Is it
mentioned anywhere?
Maharshi: Yes, in the Upanishads, the Suta Samhita (Skanda Purana),
Bhagavata, Bharata and other works.*
Q.: Are there any restrictions or discipline for that state?
M.: There are characteristics of it mentioned.
Q.: There are Gurus for each asrama. Is there a Guru for atyasrama?
M.: Yes.
Q.: But you do not admit a Guru.
M.: There is a Guru for everyone. I admit a Guru for me also.
Q.: Who is your Guru.
M.: The Self.
Q.: For whom?
M.: For myself. The Guru may be internal or external. He may reveal
Himself internally or communicate externally.
* For atyasrama, refer to Narada Parivrajaka Upanishad, v. 1-15;
Svetasvatara Up. VI. 21; Tejobindu Up. I. 47-48; Suta Samhita-Mukti Khanda
Ch. V. v. 9, 14-43; Sivamahatmya Khanda Ch. V. 32, 37fi 55.

Q.: Can the atyasramis own property?
M.: There is no restriction for them. They may do what they please.
Suka is said to have married and begotten children also.
Q.: The atyasrami is like a householder in that case.
M.: I have already said that he is above the four recognised
asramas.
Q.: If they can marry, own property, etc., they are only grihasthas.
M.: That may be your view.
Q.: Can they own property and convey the same to others?
M.: They may or may not. All depends on their prarabdha.
Q.: Is there any Karma for them?
M.: Their conduct is not regulated according to any rules or codes.
Q.: When visitors want to stay here, say two or three days, do they
take your permission?
M.: The permission from the management is permission from me. The
visitors come here for me, the management is for me. Wherever there
is mutual agreement, I do not interfere. When visitors come here and
I admit them, will others dare go against my wishes? My consent is
implied in the actions which take place with mutual goodwill.
Sri Bhagavan was shown a stanza in His own handwriting in praise of
Himself as Subrahmanya.
Sri Bhagavan said that the handwriting was His own whereas the ideas
were Perumalswami’s.
Q.: But do you not agree with the statement made in it?
M.: In the same way as an idol is praised as Subrahmanya.

13th December 1936
Talk 292.
In reply to a question if tanmatras are the operating factors in dreams,
Sri Bhagavan said: No. Tanmatras are sukshma - subtler than that.
Although the dream-creations are subtle as compared with the gross
world of the wakeful state, yet the dream-creations are gross compared
to tanmatras. Tanmatras after panchikarana give rise to the form of
the antahkarnas (inner organ, mind). There too, by the different sets

of operating causes. Influenced by satva the predominance of ether
(akasa) it gives rise to jnana (knowledge) whose seat is the brain.
vayu (air) gives rise to manas (mind)
tejas (light) gives rise to buddhi (intellect)

jala (water) gives rise to chitta (memory etc.)
prthvi (earth) gives rise to ahankara (ego).
They are samashti (collective) for the reason that they can operate
collectively or individually with any or all of the senses or organs. By
rajoguna they are changed to jnanendriyas in the vyashti (individual);
by tamoguna to karmendriyas in the vyashti (the individual). The
relation between the external world and the individual now becomes
easy because the tanmatras are common to them.
The tanmatras proceed from Prakriti. The statements on creation
differ considerably. There is mentioned yugapatsrshti (simultaneous
creation) and kramasrshti (gradual creation). The significance is not
emphasis on creation but on the original source.
Talk 293.
Mr. K. K. V. Iyer: There is no way found to go inward by means of
meditation.
M.: Where else are we now? Our very being is that.
D.: Being so, we are ignorant of it.
M.: Ignorant of what, and whose is the ignorance? If ignorant of the
Self, are there two selves?
D.: There are no two selves. The feeling of limitation cannot be
denied. Due to limitations....
M.: Limitation is only in the mind. Did you feel it in deep sleep?
You exist in sleep. You do not deny your existence then. The same
Self is now and here, in the wakeful state. You are now saying that
there are limitations. What has now happened is that there are these
differences between the two states. The differences are due to the
mind. There was no mind in sleep. whereas it is now active. The
Self exists in the absence of the mind also.
D.: Although it is understood, it is not realised.
M.: It will be by and by, with meditation.

D.: Meditation is with mind and how can it kill the mind in order to
reveal the Self?
M.: Meditation is sticking to one thought. That single thought keeps away
other thoughts; distraction of mind is a sign of its weakness. By constant
meditation it gains strength, i.e., to say, its weakness of fugitive thought
gives place to the enduring background free from thoughts. This
expanse devoid of thought is the Self. Mind in purity is the Self. Sri
Bhagavan continued in reply to the former questioner: Everyone says
“I am the body”. It is the experience of the sage as also of the ignorant.
The ignorant man believes that the Self is confined to the body only,
whereas the wise man believes that the body cannot remain apart from
the Self. The Self is infinite for him and includes the body also.
Mr. Bose said that he felt peace in His presence which lasts some
time after. He added: “Why is it not enduring?”
M.: That Peace is the Real nature. Contrary ideas are only
superimpositions. This is true bhakti, true yoga, true jnana. You
may say that this peace is acquired by practice. The wrong notions
are given up by practice. This is all. Your true nature always persists.
These flashes are only signs of the ensuing revelation of the Self.
In reply to the first questioner Bhagavan said: The Heart is the
Self. It is not within or without. The mind is Its sakti. After the
emergence of the mind, the universe appears and the body is seen
to be contained in it. Whereas all these are contained in the Self
and they cannot exist apart from the Self.

14th December 1936
Talk 294.
Mr. Parkhi: How is meditation to be practised?
M.: Meditation is, truly speaking, Atmanishtha (to be fixed as the
Self). But when thoughts cross the mind and an effort is made to
eliminate them the effort is usually termed meditation. Atmanishtha
is your real nature. Remain as you are. That is the aim.
D.: But thoughts come up. Is our effort meant to eliminate thoughts only?
M.: Yes. Meditation being on a single thought, the other thoughts
are kept away. Meditation is only negative in effect inasmuch as
thoughts are kept away.

D.: It is said Atma samstham manah krtva (fixing the mind in the
Self). But the Self is unthinkable.
M.: Why do you wish to meditate at all? Because you wish to do so
you are told Atma samstham manah krtva (fixing the mind in the
Self); why do you not remain as you are without meditating? What
is that manah (mind)? When all thoughts are eliminated it becomes
Atma samstha (fixed in the Self).
D.: If a form is given I can meditate on it and other thoughts are
eliminated. But the Self is formless.
M.: Meditation on forms or concrete objects is said to be dhyana, whereas
the enquiry into the Self is vichara (enquiry) or nididhyasana.
Explaining adhyaropapavadabhyam (superimposition and its
elimination), Sri Bhagavan pointed out that the first turns you
inward to the Self; and then according to the second, you know
that the world is not apart from the Self.

Talk 295.
16th December, 1936
Mr. Natverlal Parekh, a Gujerati gentleman who had attended the
International Religious Conference as a delegate from Baroda, came
here on a visit. He is a young man, well-groomed, alert, and quite
conscious of his well-earned merit. He presented a note containing
some questions to Sri Bhagavan.
D.: Pray help me realise Atma - Paramatma - Satchidananda.
M.: Atma - Paramatma - Satchidananda mean one and the same thing,
i.e., the Self. The Self is eternally realised. Otherwise there will
be no pleasure in it. If it is not eternal it must have a beginning;
what begins will also end; so that it is only transient. There is no
use seeking for a temporary state of affairs. The fact is that it is the
state of effortless, ever alert Peace. Effortlessness while remaining
aware is the state of Bliss, and that is Realisation.
D.: I do not want intellectual answers. I want them to be practical.
M.: Yes. Direct knowledge does not require intellectual discourses.
Since the Self is directly experienced by everyone, they are not at all
necessary. Everyone says “I am”. Is there anything more to realise?

D.: It is not clear to me.
M.: You exist. You say ‘I am’. That means existence.
D.: But I am not sure of it, i.e., my existence.
M.: Oh! Who then is speaking now?
D.: I, surely. But whether I exist or not, I am not sure. Moreover,
admitting my existence leads me nowhere.
M.: There must be one even to deny the existence. If you do not exist,
there is no questioner, and no question can arise.
D.: Let us take it that I exist.
M.: How do you know that you exist?
D.: Because I think, I feel, I see, etc.
M.: So you mean that your existence is inferred from these.
Furthermore, there is no feeling, thinking etc., in sleep and yet
there is the being.
D.: But no. I cannot say that I was in deep sleep.
M.: Do you deny your existence in sleep?
D.: I may be or may not be in sleep. God knows.
M.: When you wake up from sleep, you remember what you did
before falling asleep.
D.: I can say that I was before and after sleep, but I cannot say if I
was in sleep.
M.: Do you now say that you were asleep?
D.: Yes.
M.: How do you know unless you remember the state of sleep?
D.: It does not follow that I existed in sleep. Admission of such
existence leads nowhere.
M.: Do you mean to say that a man dies every time that sleep overtakes
him and that he resuscitates while waking?
D.: Maybe. God alone knows.
M.: Then let God come and find the solution for these riddles. If one
were to die in sleep, one will be afraid of sleep, just as one fears
death. On the other hand one courts sleep. Why should sleep be
courted unless there is pleasure in it?

D.: There is no positive pleasure in sleep. Sleep is courted only to be
rid of physical fatigue.
M.: Well, that is right. “To be free from fatigue.” There is one who
is free from fatigue.
D.: Yes.
M.: So you are in sleep and you are now too. You were happy in sleep
without feeling, thinking etc. The same one continuing now, why
are you not happy?
D.: How can it be said that there is happiness?
M.: Everyone says Sukhamahamasvapsam (I slept happily or was
blissfully asleep).
D.: I do not think that they are right. There is no sukha (bliss). It is
only absence of sorrow.
M.: Your very being is bliss. Therefore everyone says I was
blissfully asleep. That means that one remains in the primal
uncontaminated state in sleep. As for sorrow, there is no sorrow.
Where is it in order that you might speak of its absence in sleep?
The present wrong identification of the Self with the body has
given rise to all mistakes.
D.: What I want is realisation. I do not feel my inherent happy nature.
M.: Because the Self is now identified with the non-self. The non-self
too is not apart from the Self. However, there is the wrong notion
that the body is apart and the Self is confounded with the body.
This wrong identity must be ended for happiness to manifest.
D.: I am unable to help myself.
The Engineer suggested surrender to the Master.
D.: Agreed.
M.: Your nature is happiness. You say that is not apparent. See what
obstructs you from your true being. It is pointed out to you that the
obstruction is the wrong identity. Eliminate the error. The patient
must himself take the medicine prescribed by the doctor in order
that he may be cured of his illness.
D.: The patient is too weak to help himself and places himself
unconditionally in the hands of the doctor.

M.: The doctor must be given a free hand and the patient must only
remain quiet without saying anything. Similarly keep quiet. That
is effortlessness.
D.: That is the most effective medicine too.
The other questions which he wrote down were:
D.: Convince me of the existence of God.
M.: Realisation of the Self amounts to such conviction.
D.: How is prarabdha (past karma) related to purushakara (one’s
own effort here)?
M.: Prarabdha is karma (action). There must be a karta (doer) for it.
See who the karta is. Purushakara is effort. See who exerts. There
is identity established. The one who seeks to know their relation
is himself the link.
D.: What is karma and rebirth?
M.: See the karta (doer) and then the karma (action) becomes obvious.
If you are born now, rebirth may follow. See if you are born now.
D.: Help me to have jyotidarsana (vision of light).
M.: Darsana (sight) implies drashta (seer). Find him and darsana
(sight) is included in him.
Talk 296.
Poovan, a shepherd, says that he knows Sri Bhagavan since thirty
years ago, the days of Virupakshi cave. He used at times to supply
milk to the visitors in those days.
Some six years ago he had lost a sheep, for which he was searching
for three days. The sheep was pregnant and he had lost all hopes of
recovering her, because he thought that she had been set upon by
wild animals. He was one day passing by the Asramam, when Sri
Bhagavan saw him and enquired how he was. The man replied that
he was looking out for a lost sheep. Sri Bhagavan kept quiet, as is
usual with Him. Then He told the shepherd to help in lifting some
stones, which he did with great pleasure. After the work was finished,
Sri Bhagavan told him: “Go this way”, pointing the footpath towards
the town. “You will find the stray sheep on the way”. So he did and
found the lost sheep with two little lambs.

He now says, “What a Bhagavan is this! Look at the force of his
words! He is great! He never forgets even a poor man like me. He
remembers my son Manikkam also with kindness. Such are the great
ones! I am happy when I do any little work for Him, such as looking
to the cows when they are in heat”.

Talk 297.
18th December, 1936
Mr. Cohen asked: Meditation is with mind in the jagrat (waking)
state. There is mind in dream also. Why is there no meditation in
dream? Nor is it possible?
M.: Ask it in the dream.
After a short silence Sri Bhagavan continued: You are told to
meditate now and find who you are. Instead of doing it you ask
“Why is there no meditation in dream or in sleep?” If you find
out for whom there is jagrat (waking), it will be clear that dream
and sleep are also for the same one. You are the witness of jagrat
(waking), svapna (dream) and sushupti (sleep) - rather, they pass
before you. Because you are out of meditation now, these questions
arise. Stick to meditation and see if these questions arise.

Talk 298.
23rd December, 1936
A certain visitor formulated a question, saying that meditation is more
direct than investigation, because the former holds on to the truth
whereas the latter sifts the truth from untruth.
M.: For the beginner meditation on a form is more easy and agreeable.
Practice of it leads to Atmavichara which consists in sifting the
Reality from unreality.
What is the use of holding on to truth when you are filled with
antagonistic factors?
Atmavichara directly leads to realisation by removing the obstacles
which make you think that the Self is not already realised.

Talk 299.
24th December, 1936
Mr. T. K. S. Iyer asked Sri Bhagavan about the source of sound.
M.: The general opinion is that para (sound) comes from the Muladhara
(the solar plexus) at the bottom of the spine. All sounds beginning
from vaikhar (thought form) are contained in para which proceeds
from Kundalini; and Kundalini is not different from the Heart. In fact
the whole shadadhara (six-fold centre) is contained in the heart.
The sushumna with its source Kundalini is included in the Heart.
A visitor asked about antarena taluke sendrayonih.
M.: Indrayoni together with the sushumna nadi is contained (leena)
in para.

Talk 300.
25th December, 1936
A brahmachari youth who has graduated in science has been waiting
here for Grace for the last four or five months in order that some job
might drop on him like a ripe apple from the tree. He has been making
no other efforts to secure a job. His brother yesterday came here to
take him away to his parents. But the youth declined to go. An appeal
was made to Sri Bhagavan.
Sri Bhagavan said: “I do not tell anyone to come nor ask him to go.
Everyone pleases himself here. He says he finds peace in the hall and
he also wants a job. Evidently the job must be found in the hall itself
so that his peace may not be disturbed. Peace is not in the hall. It is
in the repose of the Self. It can be gained anywhere.”
Some days later the youth threw away his sacred thread and appeared
before Sri Bhagavan with his limbs shaking, which the young man
later described as his Bliss (ananda). Sri Bhagavan told him not to
make a habit of sitting in front of Him in the hall and ordered him
out. Furthermore He continued: Even a fledgling is protected by the
parent birds only till such time it grows its wings. It is not protected
for ever. Similarly with devotees. I have shown the way. You must
now be able to follow it up and find peace wherever you are.

The young man thinks that Sri Bhagavan gave him upadesa in the
following words: “The self (i.e. ego) must be subdued by oneself.
The man however has refused the offer of a job to him in one of the
local schools and thinks that he has been given a mighty job by the
Hill or by Sri Bhagavan. “What that job is the world will know later”,
he says. He had further anticipated all this day’s occurrences some
months ago and had foretold them to his mother and to his friends.
He is further happy at the happenings.
Sri Bhagavan however compared him to another man who is in no
way of the right type. And yet the boy thinks that he is Bhagavan in
embryo. Later he turned mad and died.
Talk 301.
A gentleman enthusiastically recounted several of his experiences
on following Sri Bhagavan’s instructions and incidentally mentioned
that he and Sri Bhagavan were born on the same day of the week and
bore the same name ....
Sri Bhagavan completed it, adding “The same Self is in both.”
Talk 302.
A young man from Trichy asked Sri Bhagavan on the mention in
Upadesa Manjari of atyanta vairagyam (total dispassion) as the
qualification of a ripe disciple. He continued: “What is vairagya?
Detachment from worldly pursuits and desire for salvation. Is it
not so?”
M.: Who has not got it?
Each one seeks happiness but is misled into thinking pain associated
pleasures as happiness. Such happiness is transient. His mistaken
activity gives him short-lived pleasure. Pain and pleasure alternate
with one another in the world. To discriminate between the pain-producing
and pleasure-producing matters and to confine oneself to
the happiness-producing pursuit only is vairagya. What is it that will
not be followed by pain? He seeks it and engages in it. Otherwise,
the man has one foot in the world and another foot in the spiritual
pursuit (without progressing satisfactorily in either field).

A question was again raised regarding the function of the Guru.
M.: Because the man is not able to help himself, finding himself too
weak, he seeks more strength in the shape of a Guru.
Talk 303.
Mr. K. R. V. Iyer sought more light on nada (sound).
M.: He who meditates on it feels it. There are ten kinds of nadas.
After the final thundering nada the man gets laya. That is his natural
and eternal state. Nada, jyoti, or enquiry thus take one to the same
point. (The former are indirect and the last is direct).
D.: The mind becomes peaceful for a short while and again emerges
forth. What is to be done?
M.: The peace often gained must be remembered at other times. That
peace is your natural and permanent state. By continuous practice
it will become natural. That is called the ‘current.’ That is your
true nature.
Nada, photisms, etc., imply the existence of triputi (the triads of
cogniser, cognition and the cognised). The current resulting from
investigation for the Self is suddha triputi or pure triad - that is to
say, undifferentiated triad.

Talk 304.
26th December, 1936
A Swiss lady described a photism she had to Sri Bhagavan. While
she was sitting with her eyes wide open, she saw Sri Bhagavan’s face
becoming cherub-like and draped in glorious flowers. She was drawn
in love towards that child-like face.
M.: The vision is in your mind. Your love is the cause. Paul Brunton saw
me as a giant figure; you saw me like a child. Both are visions.
(The lady said: Paul Brunton asked me if I had any spiritual
experience here, and I denied it. Now this happens).
M.: Do not be deceived by visions.
D.: If one is miles away in Europe and invokes your aid ....
M.: Where is Europe? It is in you.

D.: I have come here; I would like Maharshi to come there. (Saying
it, she laughed gently. Silence for some minutes).
M.: You see the physical body and so you find limitations. Time and
space operate on this plane. So long as you think of the gross body
there will be differences found as different bodies. On the other
hand, knowledge of the real Maharshi will set all doubts at rest.
Are you in India now? Or is India in you? Even now this notion that
you are in India must go. India is in you. In order to verify it, look to
your sleep. Did you feel that you were in Europe or in India while
asleep? You were nevertheless existing then the same as now.
Space is in you. The physical body is in space, but not you.
Paul Brunton had his eyes closed when he saw the vision, whereas
you had your eyes open, you say.
D.: Yes. But I have never had vision; whereas he is a psychic.
After a few minutes she asked if it is an advantage or a disadvantage
to see visions like this.
M.: It is an advantage.
Sri Bhagavan continued: Probably you had been thinking of a child
and that appeared in the vision ......
D.: Yes, only of Siva — of His child-like face ....
M.: That’s it.
D.: But Siva is the Destroyer ... (meaning, not a child).
M.: Yes — of sorrows.
After a few minutes Bhagavan continued: You will shortly go to
sleep. When you wake up in the morning you will say “I slept well
and happily”. What happened in sleep is your real nature. That
continues now too; otherwise it will not be your real nature. Get
the state of sleep even now; it is Siva.
Have we got a form? Find that out before you think of Siva’s form.
Did you not exist in sleep? Were you aware of any form then?
Were you with form in your sleep? You existed all the same. The
‘I’ which was in sleep is also now present. You were not the body
according to your sleep-experience. You are the same now - that
is without the body. Being without the body you were happy too
in sleep. You are the same now too. That which is enduring must

alone be the real nature. There was no body but only experience of
happiness in sleep. That endures now too. The Self is bodiless. If
you are thus without body how can Siva be with body? If you are
with body Siva also is with body. If you are not, He also is not.
D.: Why is He then Siva?
M.: Siva means embodiment of happiness - of auspiciousness.
She was very pleased. After a time she left.
Talk 305.
The visitors were talking among themselves and one of them said: “We,
though familiar with our traditional teachings, are unable to follow these
teachings (meaning Sri Bhagavan’s). How can the foreigners unfamiliar
with our ways follow Sri Bhagavan’s teachings so easily?”
He seemed to sympathise with their attempts to understand us in spite of
their handicaps, and also to pity them for want of proper equipment.
Sri Bhagavan remarked finally: Visions are better than no visions.
They get interested in that way. They do not take to foreign ideas;
when once they do it, they stick on. So much for their merits.
Sri Bhagavan later referred to Sivaprakasam Pillai’s vision. “Visions
are not external. They appear only internally. If external they must
assert themselves without there being a seer. In that case what is the
warranty for their existence? The seer only.”
Talk 306.
D.: There is something concrete necessary to meditate upon. How
shall we meditate upon ‘I’?
M.: We have become rooted in forms and so we require a concrete form for
meditating upon. Only that which we contemplate will in the end remain
over. When you contemplate the other thoughts disappear. So long as
you need to contemplate there are other thoughts, Where are you? You
contemplate because you exist. For the contemplator must contemplate.
The contemplation can only be where he is. Contemplation wards off
all other thoughts. You should merge yourself in the source. At times
we merge in the source unconsciously, as in sleep, death, swoon, etc.
What is contemplation? It is merging into the source consciously. Then

the fear of death, of swoon, etc. will disappear, because you are able
to merge into the source consciously.
Why fear death? Death cannot mean non-being. Why do you love
sleep, but not death? Do you not think now? Are you not existing now?
Did you not exist in your sleep? Even a child says that it slept well
and happily. It admits its existence in sleep, unconsciously though. So,
consciousness is our true nature. We cannot remain unconscious. We
however say that we were unconscious in our sleep because we refer
to qualified consciousness. The world, the body, etc., are so embedded
in us that this relative consciousness is taken to be the Self. Does
anyone say in his sleep that he is unconscious? He says so now. This
is the state of relative consciousness. Therefore he speaks of relative
consciousness and not of abstract consciousness. The consciousness
is beyond relative consciousness or unconsciousness.
Again reverting to Tiruvachagam, Sri Bhagavan said: All the
four foremost saints have given out their experiences in the
very first stanza. (1) Undifferentiated worship. (2) Never-failing
remembrance. (3) Unrisen thought. (4) The ego is not, the Self is.
All mean the same.
D.: But this truth is not realised.
M.: It will be realised in due course. Till then there is devotion (bhakti):
“Even for a trice you do not leave my mind.” Does he leave you
any moment? It is you who allow your mind to wander away. He
remains always steady. When your mind is fixed, you say: “He does
not leave my mind even for a trice”. How ridiculous!

Talk 307.
27th December, 1936
Mr. Shamanna from Mysore asked Sri Bhagavan: Kindly explain
Aham Sphurana (the light of ‘I-I’).
M.: ‘I’ is not known in sleep. On waking ‘I’ is perceived associated
with the body, the world and non-self in general. Such associated
‘I’ is Aham vritti. When Aham represents the Self only it is Aham
Sphurana. This is natural to the Jnani and is itself called jnana
by jnanis, or bhakti by bhaktas. Though ever present, including

in sleep, it is not perceived. It cannot be known in sleep all at
once. It must first be realised in the waking state, for it is our
true nature underlying all the three states. Efforts must be made
only in the jagrat state and the Self realised here and now. It
will afterwards be understood and realised to be continuous
Self, uninterrupted by jagrat, svapna and sushupti. Thus it is
akhandakara vritti (unbroken experience). Vritti is used for lack
of a better expression. It should not be understood to be literally
a vritti. In that case, vritti will resemble an ‘ocean-like river’,
which is absurd. Vritti is of short duration, it is qualified, directed
consciousness; or absolute consciousness broken up by cognition
of thoughts, senses, etc. Vritti is the function of the mind, whereas
the continuous consciousness transcends the mind. This is the
natural, primal state of the Jnani or the liberated being. That is
unbroken experience. It asserts itself when relative consciousness
subsides. Aham vritti (‘I-thought’) is broken, Aham sphurana (the
light of ‘I-I’) is unbroken, continuous. After the thoughts subside,
the light shines forth.

Talk 308.
31st December, 1936
A question was asked regarding untouchability.
Sri Bhagavan said: The Non-self is untouchable. The social
untouchability is man-made, whereas the other untouchability is
natural and divine.
D.: Should the untouchables be allowed into our temples?
M.: There are others to decide it.
A question was asked regarding the avatars of Vishnu.
M.: Let us know our own avatara; the knowledge of the other avataras
will follow.
Again there was a question on Isvara.
M.: Existence of Isvara follows from our conception of Isvara.
Let us first know whose concept He is. The concept will be only
according to the one who conceives. Find out who you are and the
other problem will solve itself.

Talk 309.
1st January, 1937
D.: What is the difference between Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman)
and Brahmaivaham (only Brahman I am).
M.: The former is Pratyaksha vritti (direct experience), whereas the
latter is Paroksha jnana (indirect knowledge). The first begins
with the realisation of Aham (‘I’), whereas the later starts with the
hearsay Brahman which cannot be apart from the Self, if the same
has been realised.
Talk 310.
Mr. Greenlees: After leaving this Asramam in October I was aware of
Bhagavan’s peace enfolding me for about ten days. All the time while
busy in work there was an undercurrent of that peace of unity; it was
almost like the dual consciousness while half asleep in a dull lecture.
Then it faded out entirely, and the old stupidities came in instead.
Work leaves no time for separate meditation. Is the constant reminder
“I am”, trying to feel it while actually at work, enough?
M.: It will become constant when the mind becomes strengthened.
Repeated practice strengthens the mind; and such mind is capable
of holding on to the current. In that case, engagement in work or no
engagement, the current remains unaffected and uninterrupted.
D.: No separate meditation is necessary?
M.: Meditation is your true nature now. You call it meditation, because
there are other thoughts distracting you. When these thoughts are
dispelled, you remain alone, i.e., in the state of meditation free from
thoughts; and that is your real nature which you are now attempting
to gain by keeping away other thoughts. Such keeping away of other
thoughts is now called meditation. When the practice becomes firm,
the real nature shows itself as the true meditation.
Other thoughts arise more forcibly when you attempt meditation.
There was immediately a chorus of questions by a few others.
Sri Maharshi continued: Yes, all kinds of thoughts arise in meditation. It
is but right. What lies hidden in you is brought out. Unless they rise up

how can they be destroyed? They therefore rise up spontaneously in
order to be extinguished in due course, thus to strengthen the mind.
A visitor: All are said to be Brahman.
M.: Yes, they are. But so long as you think that they are apart they are
to be avoided. If on the other hand they are found to be Self there
is no need to say ‘all’. For all that exists is only Brahman. There
is nothing besides Brahman.
D.: Ribhu Gita speaks of so many objects as unreal, adding at the end
that they are all Brahman and thus real.
M.: Yes. When you see them as so many they are asat, i.e., unreal.
Whereas when you see them as Brahman they are real, deriving
their reality from their substratum, Brahman.
D.: Why then does Upadesa Sara speak of the body, etc., as jada
i.e. insentient?
M.: Inasmuch as you say that they are body, etc., apart from the Self.
But when the Self is found this body, etc., are also found to be in
it. Afterwards no one will ask the question and no one will say that
they are insentient.
D.: Viveka is said to be discrimination between the Self and the nonself. What is the non-self?
M.: There is no non-self, in fact. The non-self also exists in the Self.
It is the Self which speaks of the non-self because it has forgotten
itself. Having lost hold of itself, it conceives something as non-self,
which is after all nothing but itself.
Then the discussion between the protagonists of various theories
became warm.

Talk 311.
2nd January, 1937
The ‘I’ which rises will also subside. That is the individual ‘I’ or the ‘I’-concept.
That which does not rise will not subside. It is and will be for ever.
That is the universal ‘I’, the perfect ‘I’, or realisation of the Self.
At 5-30 p.m. the Swiss lady complains to Sri Bhagavan that she gets
a headache if meditation be prolonged for some time.

M.: If the meditator and meditation be understood to be the same
there will be no headache or similar complaints.
D.: But they are different. How shall we consider them to be the same?
M.: That is due to your outlook. There is only one and there are no
differences. On meditation the relative consciousness will vanish. That
is not annihilation; for Absolute Consciousness arises. The Bible itself
says, “The Kingdom of Heaven is within you” . . . If you consider
yourself to be the body there is some difficulty in understanding the
statement. On the other hand if you know who you really are, the
Kingdom of Heaven and all are included in your true Self. They are
concepts arising after the ego has arisen. Drishtim jnanamayeem krtva
pasyet Brahmamayam jagat (Direct your look within and make it
absolute). With that absolute awareness realised, look without and you
will realise the universe to be not apart from the realised Absolute.
Because your outlook is externally directed you speak of a without. In that
state you are advised to look within. This within is relative to the without
you are seeking. In fact, the Self is neither without nor within.
Speaking of Heaven one thinks of it as above or below, within or
without, since one is accustomed to relative knowledge. One seeks
only objective knowledge and hence these ideas.
Really speaking there is neither up nor down, neither in nor out.
If they were real they must be present in dreamless sleep also. For
what is real must be continuous and permanent. Did you feel ‘in’
or ‘out’ in sleep? Of course not.
D.: I do not remember.
M.: If there was anything there that could be remembered. But you
admit your existence then. The same Self is now speaking. The Self
who was undifferentiated in sleep is differentiated in the present state,
and sees the diversity. The Real Existence is the only One devoid of
objective knowledge. That is absolute consciousness. That is the state
of happiness, as admitted by all of us. That state must be brought about
even in this waking state. It is called jagrat sushupti. That is mukti.
D.: The ego is the one which reincarnates.
M.: Yes. But what is reincarnation? The ego remains the same. New
bodies appear and hold it. The ego does not change. It does not leave

one body, seek and find another. Just see what happens even to your
gross body. Suppose you go to London. How do you do it? You take
a conveyance, go to the docks, board the steamer and reach London
in a few days. What has happened? The conveyances had moved,
but not your body. Still you say that you travelled from one part
of the globe to the other part. The movements of the conveyances
have been superimposed on your body. Similarly also with your
ego. The reincarnations are superimpositions. For example, what
happens in a dream? Do you go to the dream world or does it occur
in you? Surely the latter. Just the same with incarnations. The ego
remains changeless all along.
Again, there is no time and space in your sleep. They are concepts
which arise after the ‘I-thought’ has arisen. Before the rise of the
‘I-thought’ the concepts are absent. Therefore you are beyond time and
space. The ‘I-thought’ is only limited ‘I’. The real ‘I’ is unlimited,
universal, beyond time and space. They are absent in sleep. Just on
rising up from sleep, and before seeing the objective world, there is
a state of awareness which is your pure Self. That must be known.
D.: But I do not realise it.
M.: It is not an object to be realised. You are that. Who is there to
realise and what?
Talk 312.
Mr. V. K. Cholkar, of Poona: It is said “Know thyself” or see who
the “I” in you is. What is the way to do it? Is it by simply repeating
the mantra mechanically all along or have you to do it, remembering
every moment why you are repeating the mantra?
M.: You are always repeating the mantra automatically. If you are not
aware of the ajapa (unspoken chant) which is eternally going on,
you should take to japa. Japa is made with an effort. The effort is
meant to ward off other thoughts. Then the japa becomes mental
and internal. Finally, its ajapa and eternal nature will be realised.
For it will be found to be going on even without your effort. The
effortless state is the state of realisation.
Mr. Cholkar again requested instructions from a practical point of
view, i.e., suitable to himself.

M.: It is not external and therefore need not be sought elsewhere. It is
internal and also eternal. It is always realised. But you say you are
not aware. It requires constant attention to itself. No other effort
is necessary. Your effort is only meant not to allow yourself to be
distracted by other thoughts.
The person was satisfied.
Talk 313.
Mr. Greenlees: Bhagavan said yesterday that, while one is engaged in
search for “God within”, outer work would go on automatically. In the
life of Sri Chaitanya it is explained that while he sought Krishna (the
Self) during his lectures to students, he forgot where his body was and
went on talking of Krishna. This rouses doubt whether work can safely
be left to itself. Should one keep part-attention on the physical work?
M.: The Self is all. Now I ask you: Are you apart from the Self? Can
the work go on apart from the Self? Or is the body apart from
the Self? None of them could be apart from the Self. The Self is
universal. So all the actions will go on whether you engage in them
voluntarily or not. The work will go on automatically. Attending
to the Self includes attending to the work.
D.: The work may suffer if I do not attend to it.
M.: Because you identify yourself with the body, you consider that
the work is done by you. But the body and its activities, including
the work, are not apart from the Self.
What does it matter whether you attend to the work or not? Suppose you
walk from one place to another place. You do not attend every single
step that you take. After a time, however, you find yourself at your
destination. You notice how the work, i.e., walking, goes on without
your attention to it. Similarly it is with other kinds of work.
D.: Then it is like sleep-walking.
M.: Quite so. When a child is fast asleep, his mother feeds him in sleep.
The child eats the food quite as well as when well awake. But the
next morning he says to the mother “Mother! I did not take food
last night”. The mother and others know that he did. But he says
that he did not. He was not aware and yet the action had gone on.
Somnambulism is indeed a good analogy for this kind of work.

Take another example: A passenger in a cart has fallen asleep. The
bulls move or stand still or are unyoked on the journey. He does not
know these occurrences, but finds himself in a different place after
he wakes up. He has been blissfully ignorant of the occurrences on
the way, but his journey has been finished.
Similarly with the Self of the person. He is asleep in the body. His waking
state is the movement of the bulls, his samadhi is their standing still
(because samadhi = jagrat sushupti) i.e., to say, he is aware of but not
attached to actions. So the bulls are in harness but do not move. His
sleep is the unyoking of the bulls, for there is complete suspension of
activities corresponding to the release of the bulls from the yoke.
Still another example: Scenes are projected on the screen in a
cinema show. But the moving pictures do not affect or alter the
screen. The seer pays attention to the pictures and ignores the
screen. They cannot remain apart from the screen. Still its existence
is ignored. So also the Self is the screen on which the pictures,
namely activities, are going on. The man is aware of the latter,
ignoring the former. All the same he is not apart from the Self.
Whether aware or unaware the actions will continue.
D.: There is an operator in the cinema.
M.: The cinema show is made out of insentient materials. The screen,
the pictures, lamp, etc., are insentient and require an operator, a
sentient agent. In the case of the Self, it is consciousness itself and
therefore self-contained. There cannot be an operator apart.
D.: Protested that he did not confuse the body with the operator as
the above answer would imply.
M.: The functions of the body were kept in mind involving the need
for the operator. Because there is the body - a jada object - an
operator, a sentient agent, is necessary.
Because people think that they are jivas, Sri Krishna has said that
God resides in the Heart as the operator of the jivas. In fact there
are no jivas and no operator. The self comprises all. It is the screen,
the pictures, the seer, the actor, the operator, the light and all else.
Your confounding it with the body and imagining yourself as the
actor amounts to the seer being represented as an actor in a cinema

picture. Imagine the actor in the picture asking if he could enact a
scene without the screen. Such is the case of the man who thinks
of his acting apart from the Self.
D.: It is like asking the spectator to act in the cinema picture.
Somnambulism seems to be desirable.
M.: There is the belief that the crow rolls only one iris into either eye
to see any object. It has only one iris but two eye sockets. Its sight
is manipulated according to its desire.
Or again the elephant has one trunk with which it breathes and
does work such as drinking water, etc.
Again serpents are said to use the same apparatus for either seeing
or hearing.
Similarly the actions and states are according to one’s point of
view. Sleep waking or waking sleep or dreaming sleep or dreaming
wakefulness are about the same.
D.: We have to deal with a physical body in a physical waking world.
If we sleep while work is done or work when sleep overtakes us,
the work will go wrong.
M.: Sleep is not ignorance; it is your pure state. Wakefulness is not
knowledge; it is ignorance. There is full awareness in sleep; there is
total ignorance in waking. Your real nature covers both, and extends
beyond. The Self is beyond knowledge and ignorance.
Sleep, dream and waking are only modes passing before the Self.
They proceed whether you are aware or not. That is the state of the
Jnani in whom pass the states of waking, samadhi, deep sleep and
dream, like the bulls moving, standing or being unyoked when the
passenger is asleep as aforesaid. These questions are from the point
of view of the ajnani; otherwise these questions do not arise.
D.: Of course they cannot arise for the Self. Who would be there to
ask? But unfortunately I have not yet realised the Self.
M.: That is just the obstacle in your way. You must get rid of the idea
that you are an ajnani yet to realise the Self. You are the Self. Was
there ever a time when you were apart from the Self?
D.: So it is an experiment in somnambulism .... or in daydreaming.
Bhagavan laughed.

3rd January, 1937
DROPS OF NECTAR
Talk 314.
In yesterday’s answers, Sri Bhagavan said that the Self is pure
consciousness in deep slumber, and He also indicated the Self of the
transition from sleep to the waking state as the ideal for realisation.
He was requested to explain the same.
Sri Bhagavan graciously answered: The Self is pure consciousness in
sleep; it evolves as aham (‘I’) without the idam (‘this’) in the transition
stage; and manifests as aham (‘I’) and idam (‘this’) in the waking state.
The individual’s experience is by means of aham (‘I’) only. So he must aim
at realisation in the way indicated (i.e., by means of the transitional ‘I’).
Otherwise the sleep-experience does not matter to him. If the transitional
‘I’ be realised the substratum is found and that leads to the goal.
Again, sleep is said to be ajnana (ignorance). That is only in relation to
the wrong jnana (knowledge) prevalent in the wakeful state. The waking
state is really ajnana (ignorance) and the sleep state is prajnana (full
knowledge). Prajnana is Brahman, says the sruti. Brahman is eternal.
The sleep-experiencer is called prajna. He is prajnanam in all the three
states. Its particular significance in the sleep state is that He is full of
knowledge (prajnanaghana). What is ghana? There are jnana and
vijnana. Both together operate in all perceptions. Vijnana in the jagrat
is viparita jnana (wrong knowledge) i.e., ajnana (ignorance). It always
co-exists with the individual. When this becomes vispashta jnana (clear
knowledge), It is Brahman. When wrong knowledge is totally absent,
as in sleep, He remains pure prajnana only. That is Prajnanaghana.
Aitareya Upanishad says prajnana, vijnana, ajnana, samjnana are all
names of Brahman. Being made up of knowledge alone how is He
to be experienced? Experience is always with vijnana. Therefore the
pure ‘I’ of the transitional stage must be held for the experience of the
Prajnanaghana. The ‘I’ of the waking state is impure and is not useful
for such experience. Hence the use of the transitional ‘I’ or the pure ‘I’.
How is this pure ‘I’ to be realised? Viveka Chudamani says, Vijnana
kose vilasatyajasram (He is always shining forth in the intellectual
sheath, vijnana kosa). Tripura Rahasya and other works point out that

the interval between two consecutive sankalpas (ideas or thoughts)
represent the pure aham (‘I’). Therefore holding on to the pure ‘I’, one
should have the Prajnanaghana for aim, and there is the vritti present
in the attempt. All these have their proper and respective places and at
the same time lead to realisation.
Again the pure Self has been described in Viveka Chudamani to be
beyond asat, i.e., different from asat. Here asat is the contaminated
waking ‘I’. Asadvilakshana means sat, i.e., the Self of sleep. He is
also described as different from sat and asat. Both mean the same.
He is also asesha sakshi (all-seeing witness).
If pure, how is He to be experienced by means of the impure ‘I’? A
man says “I slept happily”. Happiness was his experience. If not, how
could he speak of what he had not experienced? How did he experience
happiness in sleep, if the Self was pure? Who is it that speaks of that
experience now? The speaker is the vijnanatma (ignorant self) and
he speaks of prajnanatma (pure self). How can that hold? Was this
vijnanatma present in sleep? His present statement of the experience
of happiness in sleep makes one infer his existence in sleep. How
then did he remain? Surely not as in the waking state. He was there
very subtle. Exceedingly subtle vijnanatma experiences the happy
prajnanatma by means of maya mode. It is like the rays of the moon
seen below the branches, twigs and leaves of a tree.
The subtle vijnanatma seems apparently a stranger to the obvious
vijnanatma of the present moment. Why should we infer his existence
in sleep? Should we not deny the experience of happiness and be
done with this inference? No. The fact of the experience of happiness
cannot be denied, for everyone courts sleep and prepares a nice bed
for the enjoyment of sound sleep.
This brings us to the conclusion that the cogniser, cognition and the
cognised are present in all the three states, though there are differences in
their subtleties. In the transitional state, the aham (‘I’) is suddha (pure),
because idam (‘this’) is suppressed. Aham (‘I’) predominates.
‘Why is not that pure ‘I’ realised now or even remembered by us? Because of
want of acquaintance (parichaya) with it. It can be recognised only if it is
consciously attained. Therefore make the effort and gain consciously.

Talk 315.
One of the attendants asked: Sri Bhagavan has said: ‘Reality and myth
are both the same’. How is it so?
M.: The tantriks and others of the kind condemn Sri Sankara’s philosophy
as maya vada without understanding him aright. What does he say?
He says: (1) Brahman is real; (2) the universe is a myth; (3) Brahman
is the universe. He does not stop at the second statement but continues
to supplement it with the third. What does it signify? The Universe
is conceived to be apart from Brahman and that perception is wrong.
The antagonists point to his illustration of rajju sarpa (rope snake).
This is unconditioned superimposition. After the truth of the rope is
known, the illusion of snake is removed once for all.
But they should take the conditioned superimposition also into
consideration, e.g., marumarichika or mrigatrishna (water of mirage).
The mirage does not disappear even after knowing it to be a mirage.
The vision is there but the man does not run to it for water. Sri
Sankara must be understood in the light of both the illustrations.
The world is a myth. Even after knowing it, it continues to appear.
It must be known to be Brahman and not apart.
If the world appears, yet to whom does it appear, he asks. What is
your reply? You must say the Self. If not, will the world appear in
the absence of the cognising Self? Therefore the Self is the reality.
That is his conclusion. The phenomena are real as the Self and are
myths apart from the Self.
Now, what do the tantriks, etc., say? They say that the phenomena
are real because they are part of the Reality in which they appear.
Are not these two statements the same? That is what I meant by
reality and falsehood being one and the same.
The antagonists continue: With the conditioned as well as the
unconditioned illusions considered, the phenomenon of water in
mirage is purely illusory because that water cannot be used for any
purpose. Whereas the phenomenon of the world is different, for it is
purposeful. How then does the latter stand on a par with the former?
A phenomenon cannot be a reality simply because it serves a
purpose or purposes. Take a dream for example. The dream

creations are purposeful; they serve the dream-purpose. The
dream water quenches dream thirst. The dream creation is however
contradicted in the waking state. The waking creation is contradicted
in the other two states. What is not continuous cannot be real. If
real, the thing must ever be real - and not real for a short time and
unreal at other times.
So it is with magical creations. They appear real and are yet illusory.
Similarly the universe cannot be real of itself - that is to say, apart
from the underlying Reality.
Talk 316.
There is fire on the screen in a cinema show. Does it burn the screen?
There is a cascade of water. Does it wet the screen? There are tools.
Do they damage the screen?
That is why it is said achchedyoyam, adahyoyam, akledhyoyam, etc.
Fire, water, etc. are phenomena on the screen of Brahman (i.e., the
Self) and they do not affect It.

Talk 317.
6th January, 1937
Mr. Parkhi: Many visitors here tell me that they get visions or thought-currents
from you. I am here for the last month and a half and still I have
not the slightest experience of any kind. Is it because I am unworthy of
your grace? If so, I feel it disgraceful that I being Vasishtakulotpanna
(of the lineage of Vasishta) should not have your grace, while far-off
foreigners should have it. Will you kindly suggest some prayaschitta
(method of expiation) for removing this disgrace?
M.: Visions and thought-currents are had according to the state of mind.
It depends on the individuals and not upon the Universal Presence.
Moreover, they are immaterial. What matters is Peace of Mind.
D.: Peace of mind is the result of trance. How is trance got?
M.: Trance is only absence of thoughts. That state prevails in sleep.
Do you have enduring peace of mind on that account?
D.: It is said in the journal maintained in the Asramam that trance
is necessary.

M.: Trance is not something apart to be got anew. Your natural state
is that of trance.
D.: But I do not feel it.
M.: The fact of your contrary belief is the obstruction.
D.: Since I have not realised the Self I say that I do not understand
my permanent state of trance.
M.: This is only a repetition. That is the obstruction. This arises because
you think that the non-self is you. That is the mistake. Do not take
the non-self to be the Self. Then the Self will be evident to you.
D.: I understand it theoretically but not practically.
M.: There are no two selves - for the self to speak of the non-realisation
of the Self.
D.: It is still theoretical to me. How shall I get the trance?
M.: Trance is only temporary in its effects. There is happiness so
long as it lasts. After rising from it the old vasanas return. Unless
the vasanas are destroyed in sahaja samadhi (effortless samadhi),
there is no good of trance.
D.: But trance must precede sahaja samadhi?
M.: Trance is the natural state. Although there are activities and
phenomena, yet they do not affect the trance. If they are realised
to be not apart from the Self, the Self is realised. Where is the use
of trance, unless it brings about enduring peace of mind? Know
that even now you are in trance whatever happens. That is all.
D.: But how shall I do it?
A scholar remarked: Yato vacho nivartante aprapya manasa saha
(where words fail to reach, along with the mind).
The questioner retorted: It is also said manasaiva aptavyam (to be
realised with the mind only).
M.: Yes. The Pure Mind, i.e., the mind free from thoughts is the Self.
The pure mind is beyond the impure mind.
D.: Seen with the subtlest of subtle intellect by subtle seers.
M.: What was said of mind applies to this also.
D.: If trance be my natural state, why is it said that trance is necessary
to be got before Realisation?

M.: That means that one should be aware of his eternal state of trance.
Inattentiveness to it is ignorance. Pramado vai mrtyuh (inattention
is death itself).
D.: How can I be attentive without getting trance beforehand?
M.: Very well. If you are so anxious for trance any narcotic will bring it
about. Drug-habit will be the result and not liberation. There are vasanas
in the latent state even in trance. The vasanas must be destroyed.
Another devotee: Can there be Self-Realisation before the vasanas
are entirely destroyed?
M.: There are two kinds of vasanas: (1) bandha hetuh, causing
bondage for the ignorant, and (2) bhoga hetuh, giving enjoyment
for the wise. The latter do not obstruct realisation.
D.: Are the Self-realised persons reborn? e.g., Vamadeva, Jada
Bharata, etc.
M.: The Realised ones cannot be reborn. Rebirth is due to vasanas which
are binding. But they are destroyed in the state of Self-realisation.
D.: Are we to take it that they had gone to the stage of kevala
nirvikalpa but not to sahaja nirvikalpa?
M.: Yes.
D.: If only vasanas for enjoyment do not obstruct the state of
realisation and if one can look upon the events of the world without
his state of bliss being disturbed, it means that attachment alone is
bondage. Am I right?
M.: Yes, quite. Attachment is bondage. Attachment disappears with
the elimination of the ego.
D.: Realisation is said to be helped by Guru’s Grace.
M.: Guru is none other than the Self.
D.: Krishna had Sandipini for his Guru and so Rama had Vasishta.
M.: Guru is said to be external for the seeker. The in-turn of the mind
is brought about by the Guru. Since the seeker is out-ward-bent he
is advised to learn from a Guru whom he will in due course find
to be the Self.
D.: May I have Guru’s Grace?
M.: Grace is always there.

D.: But I did not feel the same.
M.: Surrender will make one understand the Grace.
D.: I have surrendered heart and soul. I am the best judge of my heart.
Still I do not feel the Grace.
M.: If you had surrendered the questions would not arise.
D.: I have surrendered. Still the questions arise.
M.: Grace is constant. Your judgement is the variable. Where else
should the fault lie?
D.: I must be enabled to surrender myself.
M.: Thayumanavar has said: “Glory to Thee for enabling me to discuss
so much and follow Thy words so far!”

Talk 318.
7th January, 1937
A Hindi gentleman asked how the fear of death could be got over.
M.: Find out if you were born before you think of death. Only he who
is born could die. You are as good as dead even in sleep. What fear
is there of death?
D.: How are we in sleep?
M.: Ask the question in sleep. You recall the experience of sleep only when
you are awake. You recall that state by saying “I slept happily”.
D.: What is the instrument by which we experience that state?
M.: We call it Mayakarana as opposed to the antahkarana to which
we are accustomed in our other states. The same instruments are
called differently in the different states, even as the anandatman
of sleep is termed the vijnanatman of the wakeful state.
D.: Please furnish me with an illustration for the mayakarana
experiencing the ananda.
M.: How can you say “I slept happily”? The experience is there to
prove your happiness. There cannot be the remembrance in the
wakeful state in the absence of the experience in the sleep state.
D.: Agreed. But please give me an illustration.

M.: How can it be described? If you dive into water for recovering an
article you speak of its recovery only after rising out of the water.
You do not say anything while remaining sunk in water.
D.: I do not have fear in sleep whereas I have it now.
M.: Because dwiteeyadvai bhayam bhavati - fear is always of a second
one. Of what are you afraid?
D.: By reason of the perception of the body, the senses, the world,
Isvara, doership, enjoyment etc.
M.: Why do you see them if they cause fear?
D.: Because they are inescapable.
M.: But it is you who sees them. For whom is the fear? Is it for them?
D.: No, it is for me.
M.: Because you see them, you fear them. Do not see them and there
will be no fear.
D.: What then should I do in the waking state?
M.: Be the Self; there will be no second thing to cause you fear.
D.: Yes. Now I understand. If I see my Self, then the sight is warded off
the non-self and there is happiness. Yet there is the fear of death.
M.: Only the one who is born should die. See if you have been born
at all in order that death should threaten you.
Talk 319.
Mr. Sridhar, a Hindu from Goa, asked: What is kousalam (skill) in Yogah
karmasu kousalam (yoga is skill in action). How is that gained?
M.: Do actions without caring for the result. Do not think that you
are the doer. Dedicate the work to God. That is the skill and also
the way to gain it.
D.: Samatvam yoga uchyate (Equanimity is yoga). What is that
equanimity?
M.: It is unity in diversity. The universe is now seen to be diverse. See the
common factor (sama) in all the objects. When that is done equality
in the pairs of opposites (dwandwani) naturally follows. It is the latter
which is however spoken of as equanimity ordinarily.
D.: How is the common factor to be perceived in the diversity?

M.: The seer is only one. They do not appear without the seer. There
is no change in the seer, however much the others may change.
Yogah karmasu kousalam = Skill in work is yoga,
Samatvam yoga uchyate = Equanimity is yoga,
Mamekam saranam vraja = Only surrender to Me,
Ekamevadwiteeyam = Only one without a second,
representing Karma, Yoga, Bhakti and Jnana convey the same meaning.
They are only the single Truth presented in different aspects.
Mr. Ekanatha Rao: Is Grace necessary for it?
M.: Yes.
D.: How to gain Divine Grace?
M.: By surrender.
D.: Still I do not feel Grace.
M.: Sincerity is wanting. Surrender should not be verbal nor conditional.
Passages from St. Justinian were read out to illustrate these
statements.
Prayer is not verbal. It is from the heart. To merge into the Heart
is prayer. That is also Grace.
The Alwar says: “I was all along seeking Thee. But on realising the Self
I find you are the Self. The Self is my all, and so you are my All.”
D.: Impurities of limitation, ignorance and desire (anava, mayika,
and kamya) place obstacles in the way of meditation. How to
conquer them?
M.: Not to be swayed by them.
D.: Grace is necessary.
M.: Yes, Grace is both the beginning and the end. Introversion is due
to Grace: Perseverance is Grace; and Realisation is Grace. That
is the reason for the statement: Mamekam saranam vraja (only
surrender to Me). If one has entirely surrendered oneself is there
any part left to ask for Grace? He is swallowed up by Grace.
D.: The obstacles are powerful and obstruct meditation.
M.: If a Higher Power is recognised and surrendered to, how will they
obstruct you? If you say “They are powerful,” the source of their
Power must be held so that they do not obstruct you.

Talk 320.
In the course of an informal conversation Sri Bhagavan pointed out
that Self-Realisation is possible only for the fit. The vasanas must be
eliminated before jnana dawns. One must be like Janaka for jnana
to dawn. One must be ready to sacrifice everything for the Truth.
Complete renunciation is the index of fitness.
Talk 321.
D.: Miseries appear in jagrat. Why should they appear.
M.: If you see your Self they will not appear.
D.: If I turn to look who I am I do not find anything.
M.: How did you remain in your sleep? There was no ‘I-thought’ there and
you were happy. Whereas there are thoughts flowering in the wake of
the root-thought ‘I’ in the jagrat and these hide the inherent happiness.
Get rid of these thoughts which are the obstacles to happiness. Your
natural state is one of happiness as was evident in your sleep.
D.: I do not know anything of my sleep experience.
M.: But you know that it was happiness. Otherwise you would not be
saying “I slept happily”. When there is no thought, no ‘I’, and nothing
In fact except yourself, you are happy. That is the whole Truth.
This is exactly what is conveyed by the Mahavakya Tatvamasi (You
are That). Find your Self: and then “That” is known.
D.: How is that Brahman?
M.: Why do you want to know of Brahman apart from yourself? The
scripture says “You are That”. The Self is intimate to you and you
cannot indeed be without the Self. Realise it. That is the Realisation
of Brahman also.
D.: But I am unable to do it. I am too weak to realise my Self.
M.: In that case surrender yourself unreservedly and the Higher Power
will reveal Itself.
D.: What is unconditional surrender?
M.: If one surrenders oneself there will be no one to ask questions or
to be thought of. Either the thoughts are eliminated by holding on
to the root-thought ‘I’ or one surrenders oneself unconditionally to
the Higher Power. These are the only two ways for Realisation.

Talk 322.
A cultured lady, daughter of a well-known solicitor of Madras asked:
What should one do in order to remain free from thoughts as advised
by you? Is it only the enquiry “Who am I?”
M.: Only to remain still. Do it and see.
D.: It is impossible.
M.: Exactly. For the same reason the enquiry “Who am I?” is advised.
D.: Raising the question, no response comes from within.
M.: What kind of response do you expect? Are you not there? What more?
D.: Thoughts rise up more and more.
M.: Then and there raise the same question, “Who am I?”
D.: Should I do so as each thought arises? Well. Is the world our
thought only?
M.: Leave this question to the world. Let it ask, “How did I come
into being?”
D.: Do you mean that it is not related to me?
M.: Nothing is perceived in deep sleep; all these are seen only after
waking; only after thoughts arise the world comes into being; what
can it be but thought?
Another visitor asked: What should we do to make the mind still?
M.: First let the mind be caught hold of and brought here: then we
shall consider ways and means of stilling it.
D.: I meant to say that it is always changing - even when we do our japa.
M.: Japa is meant only for stilling the mind.
D.: What japa is good for it?
M.: Anything suitable, such as Gayatri.
D.: Will Gayatri do?
M.: Can anything excel it? Only those who cannot do it look for others.
It contains the whole range of truth in it. Chanting (japa) will lead
to dhyana (meditation) and it is the means for realising the Self.
D.: Will half an hour a day do for it?
M.: It must be done always, or as long as you can.

Talk 323.
While explaining stanza 6 in Arunachala Ashtaka, Sri Bhagavan
observed as follows:
The final word in the previous stanza asks, “Is there one?” The initial
words in the present stanza answer, “Yes, there is the One.....” It
proceeds, “Though it is the only One, yet by its wonderful power it gets
reflected on the tiny dot ‘I’ (the ego) otherwise known as ignorance
or the aggregate of latent tendencies; this reflected light is relative
knowledge. This, according to one’s prarabdha (past karma now
fructifying), manifests the inner latent tendencies as the outer gross
world and withdraws the gross external world as the subtle internal
tendencies; such power is called mind in the subtle plane and brain
in the physical plane. This mind or brain acts as the magnifier to that
Eternal One Being and shows It forth as the expanded universe. In
the waking and dream states the mind is out-ward bent and in sleep
it is in-ward bent; with the mind as the medium, the one Supreme
Being seems diversified in the waking and dream states and remains
withdrawn in the sleep state, or swoon, etc. Therefore you are only
That and cannot be otherwise. Whatever the changes, the same one
Being remains as yourself; there is nothing besides yourself.”
The previous stanza says: Once exposed to sunlight, a sensitive plate
cannot take on images; similarly, the mind (the sensitive plate), after
exposure in Your Light, cannot reflect the world anymore. Moreover,
the Sun is of You only. Should his rays be so powerful as to prevent
images being formed, how much more so should Your Light be? It is
thus said that there is nothing apart from the One Being, Yourself.
In the present stanza the tiny dot = the ego; the tiny dot made up of
darkness = the ego consisting of latent tendencies, the seer or the
subject or the ego rising, it expands itself as the seen, the object or
the antahkaranas (the inner organs). The light must be dim in order to
enable the ego to rise up. In broad daylight a rope does not look like
a snake. The rope itself cannot be seen in thick darkness; so there is
no chance of mistaking it for a snake. Only in dim light, in the dusk,
in light darkened by shadows or in darkness lighted by dim light does
the mistake occur of a rope seeming a snake. Similarly it is for the
Pure Radiant Being to rise up as the Ego - it is possible only in Its

Light diffused through darkness. This darkness is otherwise known
as the Original Ignorance (Original Sin). The Light passing through
it is called Reflected Light. The Reflected Light on its own merits
is commonly known as the Pure Mind or Isvara or God. Isvara is
well-known to be unified with Maya: in other words the Reflected
Light is Isvara.
The other name - Pure Mind - implies impure mind also. It is the
rajasic or active mind or the ego; this too can be projected from the
former satvic mind through another reflection only; thus the ego is
the product of the second darkness (avidya) Then comes the tamasic
or the dull mind in the shape of antahkaranas (the inner organs); this
appears as the world.
From the standpoint of the gross body it may be said to shine forth
externally as the world by means of the brain.
But the gross body is of the mind only. The mind may be said to
consist of four inner organs, or the principle composed of thoughts,
or the sixth sense; or combining intellect with the ego, and chitta with
the mind (i.e. memory-faculty with the thinking faculty), it may be
taken to consist of two parts (the ego and the mind). In the latter case
the vijnanatma (the intellectual Self) or the ego or the seer forms the
subject, and the mental sheath or the seen, the object.
The waking, dream and sleep states have their origin in the Original
Darkness (mula avidya). With the mind outgoing and deriving
experiences from its modes in the waking and dream states, and
indrawn in sleep, experiencing with modes of Maya, a unique power
regulates all activities of the individuals and of the universe. All
these are only phenomena passing through the Reflected Light on
the substratum of the Self-radiant Being.
Just as a rope-snake cannot be seen in broad daylight, nor rope itself
in thick darkness, so also the world appears neither in the samadhi
state of Self-shining pure Being or in deep sleep, swoon, etc. Only
in Reflected Light (Light mixed with Darkness or knowledge soiled
by Ignorance) can the world, not independent of its Source, seem to
rise up, flourish and be resolved. Its diversity too cannot be exclusive
of the Reality, the original Source. Here a play is going on in which
the One Single Being becomes manifold is objectified and then

withdrawn. There must be a Sakti (Power) to do it, and wonderful
too! She cannot also be independent of Her origin. In the Self-shining
Pure Being this Sakti cannot be seen. Nevertheless, Her actions are
only too well-known. How sublime!
From Her sublime original activity (i.e., power vibrating) satva-filled
reflection results; from it the rajasic ego; then tamasic thought-forms
which are commonly known as knowledge, or the light corresponding
to the magnifying lens. Just as the artificial light is projected through
a lens on to the screen, so also the Reflected Light passes through
thought (the magnifier) before expanding as the world beyond it;
furthermore, thought, itself the world in-seed form, seems to be the
wide external world. Such is the extraordinary Power! In this way
Isvara, individual and the world are only of the Reflected Light, having
the Self-shining Single Being for the substratum.
Now, what is this ‘I-thought’ (the ego)? Is it the subject or the object,
in the scheme of things?
Inasmuch as it witnesses all other objects in the waking and dream
states, or at any rate we think that it does so, it must be considered
to be the subject. On realising the Pure Self, however, it will be an
object only.
Whose is this ‘I-thought’ (the ego)? This investigation forms the
vichara.
‘I-thought’ and ‘this’-thought are both emanations from the same light.
They are related to rajoguna and tamoguna respectively. In order to
have the Reflected Light (pure satva), free from rajas and tamas it
must shine forth as ‘I-I’, unbroken by ‘this’-thought. This pure state
momentarily intervenes between sleep and waking. If prolonged it
is cosmic consciousness, or even Isvara. This is the only passage to
the Realisation of the Self-shining Supreme Being.
Again there are two kinds of experiences in deep sleep as recollected
after waking, that is, “I slept happily, unaware of anything”. Happiness
and ignorance are the experiences. Thus we see the Power modified
as (1) avarana (darkness) and (2) vikshepa (diversity). The mind is
the result of vikshepa.

10th January, 1937
SOME REMINISCENCES
Talk 324.
(1) While in Skandasramam, Sri Bhagavan saw a white toad, small
and long, at a distance of about 10 feet from Him. Sri Bhagavan stared
at it and it stared at Him. Suddenly, it took a long jump and lodged
itself precisely on one of the eyes of Sri Bhagavan who quickly closed
it and so it was not injured.
(2) There were two peacocks which used to strut with their feathers
spread out like a spangled fan. A cobra too used to take part in the
pastime and raised its hood and moved about in their midst.
(3) Sri Bhagavan says that the peacock, as soon as it sights a green
lizard, goes straight to it and meekly places its neck down before the
lizard which bites it off and kills the peacock.
(4) Rangaswami Iyengar was once out on the hill. A leopard was
nearby. He threw a stone. It turned towards him. He hurried away for
his life. Sri Bhagavan met him on the way and asked what the matter
was. Iyengar simply said ‘leopard’ as he was running. Sri Bhagavan
went where the beast was and it moved away soon after. All this
happened at the time of the plague. Leopards used to roam freely by
the side of the temple, sometimes in twos and threes.
(5) Sri Bhagavan said, “A frog is often compared to a yogi. It remains
quiet for a long time, the only sign of life being the rhythmic movement
of the under-skin below the neck.”
“Again frogs can remain for extraordinary long periods with their
animation suspended. They are said to swallow their tongues.
Swallowing the tongue is a yogic practice. The animation is suspended.
The yogi does not die but the tongue must be drawn out by someone
else before life-activity is resumed. It is a wonder how the frog brings
out the already swallowed tongue and resumes activity.”

11th January, 1937
(6) While reading “Raghuveeran” - Ramayana written in easy
Malayalam prose - there was a passage relating how Hanuman
reached Lanka mentally before he crossed over physically to that

island. Sri Bhagavan emphasised the point that the mental approach
accomplishes the purpose earlier than physical action.
(7) Sri Bhagavan related the following funny anecdote; Ezhuthachan, a
great Malayali saint and author, had a few fish concealed in him when
he entered the temple. Some enemy reported it to the worshippers in
the temple. The man was searched and taken to the king. The king
asked him “Why did you take the fish into the temple”? He replied: “It
is not my fault. I had it concealed in my clothes. The others exposed
the fish in the temple. The fault lies in exposure. Excreta within the
body are not considered filthy; but when excreted, they are considered
filthy. So also with this.”

Talk 325.
12th January, 1937
Mr. Rama Sastri from Guntur District composed eight slokas on Sri
Bhagavan and read them out with feeling.
The Sastri then prayed for guidance. “I am a samsari unfit for jnana
marga. The affairs of the world are distracting me. Please instruct
me what I should do.”
M.: Think of Bhagavan. How will the affairs of the world distract
Him? You and they are in Him.
D.: May I do nama smarana? What nama shall I take?
M.: You are Rama Sastri. Make that name significant. Be one with
Rama.

Talk 326.
13th January, 1937
In answer to a question by a long resident attendant Sri Bhagavan
said: “Everybody complains of the restlessness of the mind. Let the
mind be found and then they will know. True, when a man sits down
to meditate thoughts rush up by dozens. The mind is only a bundle
of thoughts. The attempt to push through the barrage of thoughts is
unsuccessful. If one can by any means abide in the Self it is good.
For those who are unable to do so, chanting or meditation (Japa or
dhyana) is prescribed. It is like giving a piece of chain to an elephant

to hold in its trunk. The trunk of the elephant is usually restless. It
puts it out in all directions when taken out in the streets of the town.
If given a chain to carry the restlessness is checked. Similarly with
the restless mind. If made to engage in japa or dhyana, other thoughts
are warded off: and the mind concentrates on a single thought. It thus
becomes peaceful. It does not mean that peace is gained without a
prolonged struggle. The other thoughts must be fought out.
Here is another illustration. Suppose a cow plays rogue and strays into
neighbours’ fields to graze. She is not easily weaned from her stealthy
habit. Think how she can be kept in the stall. If forcibly tethered in
the stall she simply bides her time to play the rogue. If she is tempted
with fine grass in the stall she takes one mouthful on the first day and
again waits for the opportunity to run away. The next day she takes
two mouthfuls; so she takes more and more on each succeeding day,
until finally she is weaned from her wicked tendencies. When entirely
free from bad habits she might be safely left free and she would not
stray into neighbours’ pasture land. Even when beaten in the stall,
she does not afterwards leave the place. Similarly with the mind. It
is accustomed to stray outward by the force of the latent vasanas
manifesting as thoughts. So long as there are vasanas contained
within they must come out and exhaust themselves. The thoughts
comprise the mind. Searching what the mind is, the thoughts will
recoil and the seeker will know that they arise from the Self. It is the
aggregate of these thoughts that we call ‘mind’. If one realises that
the thoughts arise from the Self and abide in their source, the mind
will disappear. After the mind ceases to exist and bliss of peace has
been realised, one will find it then as difficult to bring out a thought,
as he now finds it difficult to keep out all thoughts. Here the mind is
the cow playing the rogue; the thoughts are the neighbours’ pasture;
one’s own primal being free from thoughts is the stall.
The bliss of peace is too good to be disturbed. A man fast asleep
hates to be awakened and ordered to mind his business. The bliss
of sleep is too enthralling to be sacrificed to the work born of
thoughts. The thought-free state is one’s primal state and full of
bliss. Is it not miserable to leave such a state for the thought-ridden
and unhappy one?

If one wants to abide in the thought-free state, a struggle is inevitable.
One must fight one’s way through before regaining one’s original
primal state. If one succeeds in the fight and reaches the goal, the
enemy, namely the thoughts, will all subside in the Self and disappear
entirely. The thoughts are the enemy. They amount to the creation of
the Universe. In their absence there is neither the world nor God the
Creator. The Bliss of the Self is the single Being only.
When Prahlada was in samadhi, Vishnu thought within Himself:
“This asura being in samadhi, all the asuras are in peace. There is no
fight, no trial of strength, no search for power, nor the means for gaining
power. In the absence of such means for power - yaga, yajna, etc., i.e., the
gods are not thriving; there is no new creation; nor even is any existence
justified. So I will wake him up; then the asuras will rise up; their original
nature will manifest itself; the gods will challenge them: the asuras and
others will then seek strength and adopt the means for its acquisition.
Yajnas, etc., will flourish; the gods will thrive; there will be more and
more of creation, more of fight and I shall have enough to do”.
So Vishnu awakened Prahlada, blessing him with eternal life and
jivanmukti. Deva-asura fight was resumed and the old order of things
was restored so that the universe continues in its eternal nature.
D.: How could God Himself wake up the asura element and bring
about constant warfare? Is not Pure Goodness the nature of God?
M.: Goodness is only relative. Good always implies bad also; they
always co-exist. The one is the obverse of the other.
Talk 327.
The audience in the hall were very attentively listening. One of them,
a sincere devotee of Sri Bhagavan, was so impressed by it that he soon
lost himself. He later described his experience as follows:
“I was long wondering where the ‘current’ starts, within the body or
elsewhere. Suddenly, my body grew tenuous until it disappeared. The
enquiry ‘Who am I?’ went on very clearly and forcibly. The sound
of ‘I-I-I’ alone persisted. There was one vast expanse and nothing
more. There was a hazy perception of the occurrences in the hall. I
knew that people stood up to salute at the end of the Vedic chant. I

wanted to stand: the thought soon deserted me. I was again lost in the
one expanse. The experience continued until I heard the voice of Sri
Bhagavan. That made me collect myself. Then I stood up and saluted.
A strange feeling continued for more than half an hour. I cannot forget
it. It is still haunting me.”
Sri Bhagavan listened to his words and was silent for some minutes.
A few observations fell from his lips:
One may seem to go out of the body. But the body itself is not more
than our thought. There can be no body in the absence of thought; no
outgoing or incoming in absence of body. However, owing to habit,
the feeling of going out arises.
A particle of hail falling on the surface of the sea melts away and
becomes water, wave, froth, etc., in the sea. Similarly, the subtle
intellect, rising up as the tiny dot (ego) from the heart and bulging
out, finally enters into and becomes one with the Heart.
Though milk remains as wide as the sea, can you drink it with a
mouth as wide as the sea? You can suck it only through the tiny
capillaries of the paps.
Nammalvar, the Vaishnavite saint, has said: “Only my Self is you”. What
does it mean? “Before I realised my Self I was wandering looking out for
You; having now realised my Self I see that you are my Self”. How will
this fit in with qualified monism? It must be explained thus: “Pervading
my Self you remain as the antaryamin (Immanent Being). Thus I am a
part of your body and you are the owner of the body (sariri)”
Having given up one’s own body as not being oneself why should one
become another’s (God’s) body? If one’s body is not the Self other
bodies also are non-self.
The protagonists of qualified monism think that individuality is
necessary to experience the Bliss. Individuality, i.e., ‘I-ness’ should
not be lost. Aha! The Self is not the body but your Self becomes the
body of God! Is it not absurd?
Or if you make prapatti (surrender yourself) to God, you have made
yourself over to Him and you are His and no longer yours. If He is
in need of a body let Him look out for Himself. You need not say He
is the owner of a body.

Talk 328.
17th January, 1937
A European gentleman began in measured tones and spoke clearly
and slowly: “Why should individuals remain caught up in the affairs
of this world and reap troubles as a result? Should they not be free?
If they are in the spiritual world they will have greater freedom.”
M.: The world is only spiritual. Since you are identifying yourself with
the physical body you speak of this world as being physical and the
other world as spiritual. Whereas, that which is, is only spiritual.
D.: Do the disembodied souls, i.e., the spirits, have a deeper insight
and enjoy greater freedom?
M.: Because you identify yourself with this body, you speak of the
disembodied souls as being spirits. From these limitations you
talk of their limitations and seek to know their capacities. Even
the disembodied souls have subtle bodies, otherwise, you would
not say “disembodied souls”. Disembodiment means “divested of
this gross body”. Inasmuch as you endow them with individuality
they are centred in their subtle bodies. Their limitations will be
according to their own state. Just as you feel the burden of your
limitations they also feel the burden of their limitations. What I
meant by spirit and spiritual world is the absolute spirit and not
relative. If you realise yourself as the spirit you will see that this
world is only spiritual and not physical.
D.: Are their bodies temporary as our bodies are? Do they reincarnate?
M.: These questions arise because you think yourself the body. This
body has birth and death and when this body falls another body
arises which is called reincarnation. But are you the body? If you
find that you are not this body but the spirit, you will be free from
gross or subtle bodies, and then there will be no limitations. Where
is the world, physical or spiritual, in the absence of any limitations?
How will the question of reincarnation arise?
Again, consider it from another point of view: You create a dream-body
for yourself in the dream and act with that dream-body. The
same is falsified in the waking state. At present you think that you
are this body and not the dream-body. In your dream this body is

falsified by the dream-body. So that, you see, neither of these bodies
is real. Because each of them is true for a time and false at other
times. That which is real must be real for ever. But you say ‘I’. This
‘I’-consciousness is present all through the three states. There is no
change in it. That is alone real. The three states are false. They are
only for the mind. It is the mind which obstructs your vision of your
true nature. Your true nature is that of infinite spirit. That was the
case in your sleep. You note the limitations in the other two states.
What is the difference due to? There was no mind in sleep, but it
exists in the dream and the waking states. The feeling of limitation
is the work of the mind. What is mind? Find it. If you search for it,
it will vanish by itself. For it has no real existence. It is comprised
of thoughts. It disappears with the cessation of thoughts.
D.: Do I remain then?
M.: What is your experience in sleep? There were no thoughts, no
mind, and yet you remained then.
D.: When I try to meditate, I am unable to do so because my mind
wanders. What should I do?
M.: Your question furnishes the answer. First, with regard to the first
part of the question, you say you concentrate, but do not succeed.
‘You’ means ‘the Self’. On what do you concentrate? Where do
you fail? Are there two selves, for the one self to concentrate on the
other? Which is the self now complaining of failure? There cannot
be two selves. There is only one Self. That need not concentrate.
You ask, “But then, why is there no happiness?” What is it that prevents
you from remaining as the spirit which you are in sleep? You yourself
admit that it is the wandering mind. Find out the mind. If its ‘wandering’
stops, it will be found to be the Self - your ‘I’-consciousness which is
spirit eternal. It is beyond knowledge and ignorance.
D.: I am hard-worked and find little time to practise concentration.
Are there any aids for it? Is control of breath a good aid?
M.: Prana and mind arise from the same source. The source can be
reached by holding the breath or tracing the mind. If you cannot do
the latter the former will no doubt be helpful. Regulation of breath
is gained by watching its movements.

If the mind is watched thoughts cease. Peace results and it is your true
nature. King Janaka said: “I have now found the robber (namely the
mind) who has been robbing me of my ‘I’-ness. I will instantly kill this
thief.” The perturbation owing to thoughts appears to rob the Self of
its peace. The perturbation is the mind. When that ceases the mind is
said to take flight. The Self remains as the undisturbed substratum.
Another person interposed: The mind must kill the mind.
M.: Yes, if there be the mind. A search for it discloses its non-existence.
How can anything that does not exist be killed?
D.: Is not mental japa better than oral japa?
M.: Oral japa consists of sounds. The sounds arise from thoughts. For one
must think before one expresses the thoughts in words. The thoughts
form the mind. Therefore mental japa is better than oral japa.
D.: Should we not contemplate the japa and repeat it orally also?
M.: When the japa becomes mental where is the need for the sounds
thereof?
Japa, becoming mental, becomes contemplation. Dhyana,
contemplation and mental japa are the same. When thoughts
cease to be promiscuous and one thought persists to the exclusion
of all others it is said to be contemplation. The object of japa or
dhyana is the exclusion of several thoughts and confining oneself
to one single thought. Then that thought too vanishes into its source
- absolute consciousness, i.e., the Self. The mind engages in japa
and then sinks into its own source.
D.: The mind is said to be from the brain.
M.: Where is the brain? It is in the body. I say that the body itself is a
projection of the mind. You speak of the brain when you think of
the body. It is the mind which creates the body, the brain in it and
also ascertains that the brain is its seat.
D.: Sri Bhagavan has said in one of the works that the japa must be
traced to its source. Is it not the mind that is meant?
M.: All these are only the workings of the mind. Japa helps to fix the
mind to a single thought. All other thoughts are first subordinated
until they disappear. When it becomes mental it is called dhyana.
Dhyana is your true nature. It is however called dhyana because

it is made with effort. Effort is necessary so long as thoughts are
promiscuous. Because you are with other thoughts, you call the
continuity of a single thought, meditation or dhyana. If that dhyana
becomes effortless it will be found to be your real nature.
Talk 329.
In the morning Sri Bhagavan read out a short passage from St. Estella
in the Tamil Ramakrishna Vijayam. Its purport is: “Your enemies are
lust, passion, etc. If you feel injured turn within and find out the cause
of the injury. It is not external to you. The external causes are mere
superimpositions. If you cannot injure yourself, will the all-merciful
God injure you in any manner?”
Sri Bhagavan further said that St. Estella was a good saint, whose
teachings were quite sound.
Talk 330.
Sri Bhagavan, being asthmatic, is hoarse in throat. Oranges were
brought as offerings. Pieces were distributed as usual. Sri Bhagavan
was clearing His throat and was obliged to spit out the orange in His
mouth. He said that He had to spit it out. A gentleman said: “Probably,
it does not suit Sri Bhagavan’s health.”
M.: Would you say so if you had brought the fruits, instead of the
other person?

Talk 331.
18th January, 1937
Mrs. Roorna Jennings, an American lady of the International Peace
League, asked Sri Bhagavan about the spread of Peace in the world.
Sri Bhagavan replied that if one gains the Peace of the Self it will spread
itself without any effort on the part of the individual. When one is not
oneself peaceful, how can that one spread peace in the world?
The lady asked if it was not true that the East has a scientific approach
to the Realisation of the Self.
M.: You are already the Self. No elaborate science is necessary to
establish it.

D.: I understand the general truth of it. But there must be a practical
method for it which I call ‘science’.
M.: The cessation of such thoughts is the realisation of the Self.
Illustration: the necklace supposed lost. One does not see the world
or one’s own body, being away from the Self. Always being the Self,
one sees everything else. God and the world are all in the Heart. See
the Seer and everything will be found to be the Self. Change your
outlook. Look within. Find the Self. Who is the substratum of the
subject and the object? Find it and all problems are solved.
The lady was then told of the pamphlet, Who am I? She agreed to
read it before asking further questions of Sri Bhagavan.
Talk 332.
D.: What are the three voids (Muppazh) () in Tamil?
M.: (1) Tat = Isvara turiya.
(2) tvam = jiva turiya.
(3) asi = asi turiya.
Turiya is the substratum of the waking, dream and sleep states.
D.: The first two are all right; what is the third?
M.: All-pervasiveness is said to be the waking;
all-shining is said to be the dream;
perfection (ananta) is said to be the sleep;
that which underlies these is asi-turiya.
D.: It is so strange!
M.: Is that all? There is no limit to polemics. Listen, They say the
mahavakya Tattvamasi is common; another containing five words Tat
tvam asi ati nijam is the most secret one taught by Dakshinamurti in
Silence; corresponding to the five words they formulate five states.
Again look at Vichara Sagara; the author distinguishes adhara
from adhishthana. According to him the rope is always adhara
both when it looks like a snake and otherwise. The rope is
adhishthana because it looks different from what it really is: that
is common (samanya adhishthana). Again its appearance as the
snake itself is visesha adhishthana. Then the question is raised:

the adhishthana of Jiva is one; that of Isvara is another; how can
these two adhishthanas become one? He replies, there are the same
adhara for both the adhishthanas.
Furthermore he mentions several khyatis;
(1) asat-khyati: rope being present, there appears the snake which
is not present there.
(2) sat-khyati: rope itself looking like snake.
(3) atma-khyati: rope remaining unidentified, the remembrance of
snake, formerly seen elsewhere, creates the illusion.
(4) akhyati: totally unreal.
(5) anayatha-khyati: mental image of snake projected and seen as
if it were in front of oneself.
(6) anirvachaniya-khyati: inexplicable.
Here he raises the question: Should the world be any one of these,
whether illusory or unreal; it must be the result of previous experience.
It must have been real at that time: real once, must be real always.
He answers it: the experience need not necessarily be real; not having
seen a real snake, but only seeing a picture of it and gaining an impression,
one can mistake a rope to be a snake. Thus the world need not be real.
Why waste time in such polemics? Only turn your mind inward
and spend the time usefully.
In the union of the individual with the Supreme, the Supreme is
hearsay and the individual directly experienced. You can make use
only of direct experience; therefore look who you are.
Why is Isvara mentioned then?
Because you see the world and want to know how it came into
being. They say that it was created by God. If you know that He
created you and all else, your mind is a little satisfied and becomes
less restless than otherwise. But it is not realisation. It can be only
if you realise yourself; this is Perfection or Realisation, etc.
To resume polemics - the author of Vritti Prabhakara claims to have
studied 350,000 books before writing this book. What is the use?
Can they bring in Realisation of the Self? Vichara Sagara is full
of logic and technical terms. Can these ponderous volumes serve

any real purpose? However, some people read them and then seek
sages only to see if they can meet their questions. To read them, to
discover new doubts and to solve them, is a source of pleasure to
them. Knowing it to be sheer waste, the sages do not encourage such
people. Encourage them once and there will be no end.
Only the enquiry into the Self can be of use.
Those familiar with logic, Vritti Prabhakara, Vichara Sagara or Sutra
Bhashya, or similar large works, cannot relish small works like Truth
Revealed dealing only with the Self and that pointedly too, because
they have accumulated vasanas. Only those whose minds are less
muddy, or are pure, can relish small and purposeful works.
Talk 333.
Pratyabhijna = Prati + abhijna.
abhijna is direct perception; prati is to be reminded of what was
already known.
“This is an elephant” direct perception
“This is that elephant” is pratyabhijna
In technical works, pratyabhijna is used for realising the ever-present
Reality and recognising it.
Sunya (void or blank), ati sunya (beyond sunya) and maha sunya
(immense void), all mean the same, i.e., the Real Being only.

Talk 334.
20th January, 1937
Sri Bhagavan said that he felt no sensation in His legs though they were
massaged. “If they serve the purpose of walking what does it matter
if sensation is lost?” he asked. Then in the course of conversation he
related that a ray of light has been found which, when projected, does
not reveal the operator but enables him to witness the scene. So it is
with siddhas. They are only pure light and can see others, whereas,
they cannot be seen by others. For example Prabhulinga, while touring
in the North, came across Goraknath. The latter displayed his yogic

powers e.g., when his arm was cut by a sword, the sword was blunted
without inflicting injury on him. This is making the body proof against
injury (kayasiddhi). Prabhulinga offered himself to be cut. When the
sword was thrust, it passed through and through his body as if it was
air and there was no injury on the body. Gorak was astonished and
offered himself as the disciple of Prabhulinga.
Again, there was a dialogue between Siva and Parvati in Kailas.
Siva said that Allama was one who would not be affected by Her
blandishments. Parvati wanted to try it and so sent Her tamasic quality
to incarnate as a king’s daughter on the Earth in order that she might
entice Allama. She grew up as a highly accomplished girl. She used to
sing in the temple. Allama used to go there and play on the drum. She
lost herself in the play of the drum. She fell in love with him. They met
in her bedroom. When she embraced him he became intangible. She
grew lovesick. But a celestial damsel was sent to remind her of her
purpose on the Earth. She resolved to overthrow Allama but did not
succeed. Finally she went up to Kailas. Then Parvati sent Her satvic
quality who was born as a Brahman sanyasini. When she surrendered
to Allama she realised his true greatness.
Sri Bhagavan spoke very appreciatively of Nayana, i.e., Kavyakantha
Ganapathi Muni, for about an hour, how he wrote Uma Sahasram
and Hara Sahasram, how he taught his students, how he engaged in
dispute with Bhattasri Narayana Sastri, how meek and humble he
was though so learned and capable, etc.
Sri Bhagavan related how Nakkirar, a Sanga Pulavar (Poet), faced
the wrath of Siva on questioning some composition of Siva in Tamil,
how he was taken captive by a spirit and afterwards released.
Nakkirar was doing tapas on the bank of a tirtha. A leaf fell down
from a tree; half the leaf touched the water and the other half was on
the ground. Suddenly the water-half became a fish and the land-half
became a bird. Each of them was united to the other by the leaf and
struggled to go into its own element. Nakkirar was watching it in
wonder and suddenly a spirit came down from above and carried him
away to a cave where were already 999 captives all of whom were
tapo bhrashta (those who had fallen away from their austerities).
D.: Was Nakkirar a tapo bhrashta?

M.: Yes. While engaged in contemplation why did he fall away from
contemplation and take to watching the mysterious happening in
front of him?
He continued to say how Nakkirar composed Tirumuruhatruppadai,
and obtained the release of all the thousand prisoners.

Talk 335.
21st January, 1937
D.: How will the sexual impulse cease to be?
M.: When differentiation ceases.
D.: How can it be effected?
M.: The other sex and its relation are only mental concepts. The Upanishad
says that all are dear because the Self is beloved of all. One’s happiness
is within; the love is of the Self only. It is only within; do not think it
to be without: then differentiation ceases to operate.

Talk 336.
22nd January, 1937
A certain Vaisya who seems to have studied the Upanishads and
Srimad Bhagavad Gita asked some questions:
D.: How to realise the Self?
M.: The Self is always directly perceived. There is no moment when it is not
so. How then is it to be ascertained? Find out the Self. You are that.
D.: But it is said the heart-knots are cut away and all doubts end when
the Supreme is found. The word drishti is used.
M.: To be the Self is the same as seeing the Self. There are no two
selves for the one to see the other.
Later, he continued the same question of investigation of the Self.
D.: How to realise the Self?
M.: It is already realised. One should know this simple fact. That is all.
D.: But I do not know it. How shall I know it?
M.: Do you deny your existence?
D.: No: how can that be done?

M.: Then the truth is admitted.
D.: Yet, I do not see. How shall I realise the Self?
M.: Find out who says ‘I’.
D.: Yes. I say ‘I’.
M.: Who is this ‘I’? Is it the body or some one besides the body?
D.: It is not the body. It is someone besides it
M.: Find it out.
D.: I am unable to do it. How shall I find it?
M.: You are now aware of the body. You were not aware of the body in
deep sleep. Still you remained in sleep. After waking up you hold
the body and say “I cannot realise the Self”. Did you say so in your
sleep? Because you were undivided (akhanda) then, you did not
say so. Now that you are contracted within the limits of the body
you say “I have not realised”. Why do you limit your Self and then
feel miserable? Be of your true nature and happy. You did not say
‘I’ in sleep. You say so now. Why? Because you hold to the body.
Find out wherefrom this ‘I’ comes. Then the Self is realised.
The body being insentient cannot say ‘I’. The Self being infinite
cannot say ‘I’ either. Who then says ‘I’?
D.: I do not yet understand. How to find the ‘I’?
M.: Find out where from this ‘I’ arises. Then this ‘I’ will disappear
and the infinite Self will remain. This ‘I’ is only the knot between
the sentient and the insentient. The body is not ‘I’, the Self is not
‘I’. Who, then, is the ‘I’? Wherefrom does it arise?
D.: Where from does it arise?
M.: Find out.
D.: I do not know. Please enlighten me.
M.: It is not from without. It is from within. Where does it come
from? If elsewhere you can be led there. Being within, you must
find it out yourself.
D.: From the head?
M.: Does the concept of ‘head’ arise after the ‘I’ or does ‘I’ arise
from the head? If ‘I’ be in the head why do you bend it when sleep

overpowers you? ‘I’ is ever constant. So also must its seat be. If
the head bends at one time and is erect at another time how can it
be the seat of ‘I’? Your head is laid flat in sleep. When awake it is
raised up. Can it be the ‘I’?
D.: Which is it then?
M.: ‘I’ comes from within. When asleep there is no ‘I’. Just before
waking there is ‘I-thought’.
D.: The heart-knot is said to be between the eyebrows.
M.: Some say “between the eyebrows”; others “at the coccyx”, and
so on. All these are from the standpoint of the body.
The body comes after the ‘I-thought’.
D.: But I cannot divest myself of the body.
M.: So you admit that you are not the body.
D.: If there is pain in this body, I feel it; but not if another body is
injured. I cannot get over this body.
M.: This identity is the cause of such feeling. That is the hrdaya
granthi (heart-knot).
D.: How is this knot to go?
M.: For whom is the knot? Why do you want it to go? Does it ask
or do you ask?
D.: It cannot ask; I am asking.
M.: Who is that ‘I’? If that is found the knot will not remain.
D.: The knot is concomitant with the body. The body is due to birth.
How is rebirth to cease?
M.: Who is born? Is the Self born? Or is it the body?
D.: It is the body.
M.: Then let the body ask how its rebirth may cease.
D.: It will not ask. So I am asking.
M.: Whose is the body? You were without it in your deep sleep. After
the ‘I-thought’ arose the body arose. The first birth is that of ‘I-thought’.
The body has its birth subsequent to ‘I-thought’. So its
birth is secondary. Get rid of the primary cause and the secondary
one will disappear by itself.

D.: How is that ‘I-thought’ to be checked from rising?
M.: By Self-quest.
D.: I try to understand but without success. Can I find the Self by
means of japa? If so, please tell me how.
M.: What japa? Why should you make artificial Japa? You can find
out the eternal and natural japa always going on within you.
D.: Some upadesh will probably help me.
M.: If I say “Do - Rama, Rama” to one who has not struggled through
books like you, he will do it and stick to it. If I say so to one like
you who have read much and are investigating matters, you will
not do it for long, because you will think, “Why should I do it?
Above all, who am I that should be repeating the mantra? Let me
find who I am before I proceed further”; and so you will stop japa
and begin investigation.
D.: It is said: The senses are out-going (paranchikhani); inward
turned (is) sight (avrittachakshuh). What is avrittachakshuh
(inward-turned sight)?
M.: It does not mean replacement of the eyeball in the opposite
direction. What is chakshuh?
D.: The eye.
M.: Does the eye see or is it someone behind the eye that sees? If the
eye could see, then does a corpse see? The one who is behind the
eye sees through the eye. He is meant by the word chakshuh.
D.: Divya chakshuh is necessary to see the glory of God. This physical
eye is the ordinary chakshuh.
M.: Oh! I see. You want to see million-sun-splendour and the rest
of it!
D.: Can we not see the glory as million-sun-splendour?
M.: Can you see the single sun? Why do you ask for millions of suns?
D.: It must be possible to do so by divine sight. “Where the sun shines
not, etc. That is My Supreme abode”. Therefore there is a state
where this sun is powerless. That state is that of God.
M.: All right. Find Krishna and the problem is solved.
D.: Krishna is not alive.

M.: Is that what you have learnt from the Gita? Does He not say that
He is eternal? Of what are you thinking, His body?
D.: He taught others while alive. Those around Him must have
realised. I seek a similar living Guru.
M.: Is Gita then useless after He withdrew His body? Did He speak
of His body as Krishna?
Natwewaham jatu nasam ... (Never I was not....)
D.: But I want a living Guru who can say the truth first hand.
M.: The fate of the Guru will be similar to the fate of Krishna.
The questioner retired. Later, Sri Bhagavan said: Divine sight means
Self-luminosity. The world divya shows it. The full word means
the Self. Who is to bestow a divine eye? And who is to see? Again,
people read in the books, “hearing, reflection and one-pointedness
are necessary”. They think that they must pass through savikalpa
samadhi and nirvikalpa samadhi before attaining Realisation.
Hence all these questions. Why should they wander in that maze?
What do they gain at the end? It is only cessation of the trouble of
seeking. They find that the Self is eternal and self-evident. Why
should they not get that repose even this moment?
A simple man, not learned, is satisfied with japa or worship. A Jnani
is of course satisfied. The whole trouble is for the book-worms.
Well, well. They will also get on.
Talk 337.
Mr K. R. V. Iyer: How is the mind to be purified?
M.: The sastras say: “By karma, bhakti and so on”. My attendant
asked the same question once before. He was told, “By karma
dedicated to God”. It is not enough that one thinks of God while
doing the karma, but one must continually and unceasingly think
of Him. Then alone will the mind become pure.
The attendant applies it to himself and says, “It is not enough that I serve
Sri Bhagavan physically. But I must unceasingly remember Him”.
To another person, who asked the same question, Bhagavan said:
Quest of the Self, meaning, ‘I am-the-body’ idea must vanish. (Atma
vichara = disappearance of dehatma buddhi).

Talk 338.
23rd January, 1937
Mrs. Jennings, an American lady, asked a few questions:
D.: Is not affirmation of God more effective than the quest, “who am
I?” Affirmation is positive, whereas the other is negation. Moreover,
it indicates separateness.
M.: So long as you seek to know how to realise, this advice is given to
find your Self. Your seeking the method denotes your separateness.
D.: Is it not better to say ‘I am the Supreme Being’ than ask ‘Who am I?’
M.: Who affirms? There must be one to do it. Find that one.
D.: Is not meditation better than investigation?
M.: Meditation implies mental imagery, whereas investigation is for the
Reality. The former is objective, whereas the latter is subjective.
D.: There must be a scientific approach to this subject.
M.: To eschew unreality and seek the Reality is scientific.
D.: I mean there must be a gradual elimination, first of the mind, then
of the intellect, then of the ego.
M.: The Self alone is Real. All others are unreal. The mind and intellect
do not remain apart from you.
The Bible says, “Be still and know that I am God”. Stillness is the
sole requisite for the realisation of the Self as God.
D.: Will the West ever understand this teaching?
M.: There is no question of time and space. Understanding depends
on ripeness of mind. What does it matter if one lives in the East
or in the West?
Sri Bhagavan referred the lady to a few stanzas in Truth Revealed
and to Thayumanavar. She retired.
Later Sri Bhagavan said the whole Vedanta is contained in the two
Biblical statements:
“I am that I AM” and “Be still and know that I am God.”
Mr. K. S. N. Iyer, a Railway Officer, said to Sri Bhagavan that the
compiler of Cosmic Consciousness considers realisation to be possible
only within certain limits of age in an individual’s life.

M.: Does anyone say “I must come into being before or after some age?”
He is here and now. Statements like this are misleading because people
come to believe that they cannot realise the Self in this incarnation and
must needs take chances in another. It is all absurd.
Talk 339.
With regard to Siva Visishtadvaita, (i.e., Saiva Siddhanta), Sri Bhagavan
said: Garudoham bhavana ‘I am Garuda’ - conception does not make a
garuda of a man. All the same the poisonous effects of snake-bite are
cured. Similarly with Sivoham bhavana (I-am-Siva) conception also.
One is not transformed into Siva, but the ruinous effects of the ego are
put an end to. Or the person retains his individuality but remains pure,
i.e., fit for constituting a part of the body of Siva. Becoming so he can
enjoy the Supreme Bliss. That is liberation - say the Saiva Siddhantis.
This simply betrays the love of their individuality and is in no way the
true experience of liberation.
Talk 340.
Mr. Bose began, “After the return of body-consciousness ...”
M.: What is body-consciousness? Tell us that first. Who are you
apart from consciousness? Body is found because there is body-consciousness
which arises from ‘I-consciousness’ which again rises from consciousness.

Consciousness → ‘I-consciousness’ → body-consciousness → body.

There is always consciousness and nothing but that. What you are
now considering to be body-consciousness is due to superimposition.
If there is only consciousness and nothing but it, the meaning of the
Scripture Atmanastu kamaya sarvam priyam bhavati - (All are dear
because of the love of the Self) becomes clear.
A question arises, why there should be suicides in that case.
Why does one do it? Because he is unhappy and desires to put
an end to his unhappiness. He actually does it by ending the
association with the body which represents all unhappiness.
For there must be a killer to kill the body. He is the survivor after
suicide. That is the Self.

Talk 341.
Mrs Jennings: Sri Bhagavan says that the state of Realisation is
freedom from the tyranny of thoughts. Have not the thoughts got
a place in the scheme of things - maybe on a lower plane?
M.: The thoughts arise from the ‘I-thought’ which in its turn arises
from the Self. Therefore the Self manifests as ‘I’ and other thoughts.
What does it matter if there are thoughts or no thoughts?
D.: Are good thoughts helpful for Realisation? Are they not authentic
via media, a lower rung of the ladder, to Realisation?
M.: Yes - this way. They keep off bad thoughts. They must themselves
disappear before the state of Realisation.
D.: But are not creative thoughts an aspect of Realisation and therefore
helpful?
M.: Helpful only in the way said before. They must all disappear in
the Self. Thoughts, good or bad, take you farther and not nearer,
because the Self is more intimate than thoughts. You are Self,
whereas the thoughts are alien to the Self.
D.: So the Self finally absorbs its own creation which had helped its
Realisation. Whereas civilisation wrongly worships and so separates
and ‘short-circuits’ its own creations which had helped its advance.
M.: Are you not distinct from thoughts? Do you not exist without
them? But can the thoughts exist without you?
D.: Is civilisation generally, slowly but surely, advancing in the right
direction towards this Self-Realisation?
M.: Civilisation is in the order of things. It will finally resolve itself
- as all others - in the Realisation of the Self.
D.: Is a fine type of primitive man nearer to Realisation than a civilised
man governed by intellect and thought?
M.: A realised man may look a savage, but a savage is not a realised
man.
D.: Is it right to think that all that happens to us are God’s ordainment,
and therefore only good?
M.: Of course it is. Yet all others and God are not apart from the Self.
How can thoughts of them arise when you remain as the Self?

D.: Is ‘surrender’ accepting all physical annoyances such as ants,
mosquitoes, snakes, etc., and, in accepting, willing or ceasing to
be really hurt by them?
M.: Whatever it is, is it apart from you, the seer or the thinker?
A Parsi lady from the audience intervened: If they are not apart,
do we not feel the sting of the ants?
M.: Whom does the ant sting? It is the body. You are not the body.
So long as you identify yourself with the body, you see the ants,
plants, etc. If you remain as the Self, there are not others apart
from the Self.
D.: The body feels the pain of the sting.
M.: If the body feels it, let it ask. Let the body take care of itself. How
does it matter to you?
The American lady again: Does complete surrender mean that all
noise and disturbance in our environment, even during meditation,
must be accepted? Or should we seek a cave in a mountain for
solitude? Did not Bhagavan do this?
M.: There is no going or returning. The Self is said to be unaffected
by the elements, infinite, eternal. It cannot move. There is no place
to move in for the Self.
D.: But, in the process of finding the Self, is this seeking external
help spiritually legitimate?
M.: The error lies in the identification of the Self with the body.
If Bhagavan is the body you may ask that body. But understand
him whom you address as Bhagavan. He is not the body. He
is the Self.
Then she referred to an article in Harijan where it is said that everything
is God and nothing belongs to the individual, and so on.
M.: Everything, the individual, God and all are only the Self.
Then she read some lines from Shelley and asked if Shelley was
not a realised soul.
Within a cavern of man’s trackless spirit
Is throned an Image so intensely fair
That the adventurous thoughts that wander near it

Worship, and as they kneel, tremble and fear
The splendour of its presence, and the light
Penetrates their dreamlike frame
Till they become charged with the strength of flame.
M.: Yes. The lines are excellent. He must have realised what he wrote.
The lady then thanked Sri Bhagavan and retired.
Talk 342.
At 11 p.m. in the night a group of Andhras came from Guntur,
consisting of a middle-aged woman with a sad but firm look, her
mother and two men. They requested audience with Sri Bhagavan.
The woman said to Sri Bhagavan:
“When my son was in the womb my husband died. The son was born
posthumous. He grew up all right for five years. Then he was attacked
by infantile paralysis. When nine he was bedridden. Nevertheless he
was bright and cheerful. For two years he was in that condition and now
they say that he is dead. I know that he is only sleeping and will awake
soon. When they said that he had collapsed I was shocked. I saw in a
vision a sadhu who appeared to pass his hands over the child’s body
and the child awoke refreshed. I believe that sadhu is yourself. Please
come and touch the boy so that he may get up,” she prayed.
Sri Bhagavan asked what the doctor said.
She replied, “They say that he is dead. But what do they know? I have
brought the boy all the way from Guntur to this place”.
Someone asked: “How? Is the corpse brought here?”
She: They said that the corpse would be taken by paying special rates
at 1⁄2 rupee per mile. We have paid Rs.150/- for it, and brought
it as luggage.
M.: If your vision be correct the boy will wake up tomorrow.
She: Please touch him. May I bring him into the compound?
The others protested and persuaded them to leave.
They left and the next morning the corpse was reported to have
been cremated.

When asked, Sri Bhagavan said: It is said of some saints that they
revived the dead. They, too, did not revive all the dead. If that could
be done there will be no world, no death, no cemetery, etc.
One man asked: The mother’s faith was very remarkable. How
could she have had such a hopeful vision and still be disappointed?
Can it be a superimposition attendant on her child’s love?
M.: She and her child not being real, how can the vision alone be a
superimposition?
D.: Then how is it to be explained?
No answer.
Talk 343.
D.: Even as the hand is cut off, one must remain unaware of it because
Bhagavad Gita declares that the Self is different from the body.
M.: Does jnana consist in being unaware of the pain of injury?
D.: Should he not remain unaware of pain?
M.: Major operations are performed under anaesthetics, keeping the
patient unaware of the pain. Does the patient gain jnana too, at the
same time? Insensibility to pain cannot be jnana.
D.: Should not a Jnani (a sage) be insensible to pain?
M.: Physical pain only follows body-consciousness; it cannot be in the
absence of body-consciousness. Mind, being unaware of the body, cannot
be aware of its pains or pleasures. Read the story of Indra and Ahalya in
Yoga Vasishta; there death itself is said to be an act of mind.
Pains are dependent on the ego; they cannot be without the ‘I’, but
‘I’ can remain without them.
Talk 344
D.: Vichara Sagara relates four obstacles to Self-Realisation.
M.: Why only four? Some say they are nine. Sleep is one of them. What
is sleep? It is only the obverse of waking. It cannot be independent
of waking. Sleep is unalloyed Self. Do not think you are awake:
sleep cannot be, nor the three states either. Only forgetting the Self
you say you dreamt. Can anything exist in the absence of the Self?
Why do you leave it out and hold the non-self?

As the mind tends to go out turn it inwards then and there. It goes
out owing to the habit of looking for happiness outside oneself;
but the knowledge that the external objects are not the cause of
happiness will keep it in check. This is vairagya or dispassion.
Only after perfect vairagya the mind becomes steady.
The mind is only a mixture of knowledge and ignorance or of sleep
and waking. It functions in five ways:
Kshipta (active);
Moodha (dull);
Vikshipta (distracted);
Kashaya (latent); and
Ekagrya (one-pointed).
Of these kashaya is only the latency of tendencies and not the
tendencies themselves such as attachment, repulsion, etc.
Yourself being ananda (Bliss), why should you enjoy it saying,
“Ah! How blissful!” This is rasasvada.
During the marriage ceremonies a virgin feels happy as a bride
without experiencing the embrace of man: this is rasasvada.
D.: Jivanmukti (liberated while alive) itself being ananda . . . .
Sri Bhagavan interrupted: Do not look for sastras. What is
jivanmukti? What is ananda? Liberation itself is in doubt. What
are all these words? Can they be independent of the Self.
D.: Only we have no experience of all this.
M.: What is not, is always lost; what is, is ever present, here and now. This
is the eternal order of things. Example: necklace round the neck.
Talk 345.
Sri Bhagavan continued, after interval: Destroy the power of mind by
seeking it. When the mind is examined its activities cease automatically.
Looking for the source of mind is another method. The source may
be said to be God or Self or consciousness.
Concentrating on one thought, all other thoughts disappear; finally that
thought also disappears. It is necessary to be aware while controlling
thoughts, otherwise it will lead to sleep.

D.: How to seek the mind?
M.: Breath-control may do as an aid but can never lead to the goal itself.
While doing it mechanically, take care to be alert in mind and remember
the ‘I-thought’ and seek its source. Then you will find that where breath
sinks, there the ‘I-thought’ arises. They sink and rise together. The
‘I-thought’ also will sink along with breath. Simultaneously another
luminous and infinite “I-I” will manifest and it will be continuous and
unbroken. That is the goal. It goes by different names - God, Self,
Kundalini-Sakti, consciousness etc., etc.
When the attempt is made it will of itself take you to the goal.
Talk 346.
Free will and Destiny last as long as the body lasts. But wisdom
transcends both, for the Self is beyond knowledge and ignorance.
Talk 347.
The mind is a bundle of thoughts. The thoughts arise because
there is the thinker. The thinker is the ego. The ego, if sought, will
automatically vanish. The ego and the mind are the same. The ego is
the root-thought from which all other thoughts arise.
Talk 348.
D.: There are times when persons and things take on a vague, almost
transparent form, as in a dream. One ceases to observe them as from
outside, but is passively conscious of their existence, while not
actively conscious of any kind of selfhood. There is a deep quietness
in the mind. Is it, at such times, ready to dive into the Self? Or is
this condition unhealthy, the result of self-hypnotism? Should it be
encouraged as a means of getting temporary peace?
M.: There is consciousness along with quietness in the mind; this is
exactly the state to be aimed at. The fact that the question has been
framed on this point, without realising that it is the Self, shows that
the state is not steady but casual.
The word ‘diving’ is appropriate to the state of outgoing tendencies
when the mind is to be diverted and turned within so as to dive below
the surface of externalities. But when deep quietness prevails without

obstructing the consciousness, where is the need to dive? If the state be
not realised as the Self, the effort to do so may be called ‘diving’. The
state may in that way be said to be suitable for realisation or ‘diving’.
Thus the last two questions in the paragraph are unnecessary.
D.: The mind continues to feel partial towards children, possibly
because of the form sometimes used to personify the Ideal. How
can this preference be outgrown?
M.: Hold the Self. Why think of children and reactions towards them?
D.: This third visit to Tiruvannamalai seems to have intensified the sense
of egoism in me and made meditation less easy. Is this an unimportant
passing phase or a sign that I should avoid such places hereafter?
M.: It is imaginary. This place or another is within you. Such
imaginations must end so that the places have nothing to do with
the activities of the mind. Even your surroundings are not of your
own accord; they are there as a matter of course. You must rise
above them and not get yourself involved.
Talk 349.

SRI SANKARA’S PATH TO SALVATION
THROUGH DISCRIMINATION
A Note By Sri Maharshi
(In the current issue of The Vision is published the following note, being
the translation by Mr. S. Krishna, M. A., of Sri Ramana Maharshi’s
preface to his translation of Sri Sankara’s Viveka Chudamani or
“Crown-gem of Discrimination”).
Every being in the world yearns to be always happy, free from the
taint of sorrow; and desires to get rid of bodily ailments which are
not of his true nature. Further, everyone cherishes the greatest love
for himself: and this love is not possible in the absence of happiness.
In deep sleep, though devoid of everything, one has the experience
of being happy. Yet, due to the ignorance of the real nature of one’s
own being, which is happiness itself, people flounder in the vast ocean
of material existence forsaking the right path that leads to happiness
and act under the mistaken belief that the way to be happy consists
in obtaining the pleasures of this and the other world.

A SAFE GUIDE: But alas, that happiness which has not the taint of
sorrow is not realised. It is precisely for the purpose of pointing out
the straight path to happiness that God Siva took on the guise of
Sri Sankaracharya, wrote the commentaries on the Triune Institutes
(Prasthana Traya) of the Vedanta, which extol the excellence of
this bliss; and demonstrated it by his own example in life. These
commentaries, however, are of little use to those ardent seekers who
are intent upon realising the bliss of absolution, but have not the
scholarship for studying them.
It is for such as these that Sri Sankara revealed the essence of the
commentaries in this short treatise, “The Crown-gem of Discrimination”,
explaining in detail the points that have to be grasped by those who seek
absolution, and thereby directing them to the true and straight path.
LEARNING WON’T DO: Sri Sankara opens the theme by observing that it
is hard indeed to attain human birth, and one should (having attained
it) strive for the realisation of the bliss of liberation, which is verily the
nature of one’s being. By jnana or Knowledge alone is this bliss realised,
and jnana is achieved only through vichara or steady enquiry. In order
to know this method of enquiry, says Sri Sankara, one should seek the
favour of a Guru, and proceeds to describe the qualities of the Guru
and his sishya and how the latter should approach and serve his master.
He further emphasises that in order to realise the bliss of liberation
one’s own individual effort is an essential factor. Mere book-learning
never yields this bliss which can be realised only through enquiry or
vichara, which consists of sravana or devoted attention to the precepts
of the Guru, manana or deep contemplation and Nididhyasana or the
cultivation of steady poise in the Self.
THE THREE PATHS: The three bodies - physical, subtle and causal - are
non-self and are unreal. The Self, or ‘I’, is quite different from them.
It is due to ignorance that the sense of the Self or the ‘I’ notion is
foisted on that which is not Self, and this indeed is bondage. Since
from ignorance arises bondage, from Knowledge ensues liberation.
To know this from the Guru is sravana.
To reject the three bodies consisting of the five sheaths (physical, vital,
mental, gnostic and blissful) as not ‘I’ and to extract through subtle

enquiry of “Who am I?” - even as the central blade of grass is
delicately drawn out from its whorl - that which is different from all
the three bodies and is existent as one and universal in the heart as
Aham or ‘I’ and denoted by the words Tvam (in the Scriptural dictum
- ‘Tat-tvam-asi’ - That thou art). This process of subtle enquiry is
manana or deep contemplation.
THE BEATITUDE: The world of name and form is but an adjunct of
Sat or Brahman, and being not different from it is rejected as such
and is affirmed as nothing else but Brahman. The instruction by the
Guru to the disciple of the Mahavakya, Tat-tvam-asi, which declares
the identity of the Self and the Supreme, is upadesa. The disciple is
then enjoined to remain in the beatitude of Aham-Brahman - ‘I’ the
Absolute. Nevertheless the old tendencies of the mind sprout up thick
and strong and form an obstruction (to that state of beatitude). These
tendencies are threefold and egoism, which is their root, flourishes in
the externalised and differentiating consciousness caused by the forces
of vikshepa or dissipation (due to rajas) and avarana or envelopment
(due to tamas).
CHURNING THE MIND: To install the mind firmly in the heart until
these forces are destroyed and to awaken with unswerving, ceaseless
vigilance the true and cognate tendency which is characteristic of
the Atman and is expressed by the dicta, Aham Brahmasmi (I am
Brahman), and Brahmaivaham (Brahman alone am I) is termed
nididhyasana or atmanusandhana, i.e., constancy in the Self. This is
otherwise called Bhakti, Yoga and Dhyana.
Atmanusandhana has been likened to churning the curd to draw
forth butter, the mind being compared to the churning rod, the heart
to the curd and the practice of constancy in the Self to the process
of churning. Just as by churning the curd butter is extracted and by
friction fire is kindled, even so, by unswerving vigilant constancy
in the Self, ceaseless like the unbroken filamentary flow of oil, is
generated the natural or changeless trance or nirvikalpa samadhi,
which readily and spontaneously yields that direct, immediate,
unobstructed and universal perception of Brahman, which is at
once Knowledge and Experience and which transcends time and
space.

LIMITLESS BLISS: This is Self-Realisation; and thereby is cut asunder
the hridaya-granthi or the Knot of the Heart. The false delusions of
ignorance, the vicious and age-long tendencies of the mind, which
constitute this knot, are destroyed. All doubts are dispelled and the
bondage of Karma is severed.
Thus has Sri Sankara described, in this “Crown-gem of
Discrimination,” samadhi or trance transcendent, which is the
limitless bliss of liberation, beyond doubt and duality, and has at
the same time indicated the means for its attainments. To realise
this state of freedom from duality is the summum bonum of life:
and he alone that has won it is a jivanmukta (the liberated one while
yet alive), and not he who has merely a theoretical understanding
of what constitutes purushartha or the desired end and aim of
human endeavour.
FINAL FREEDOM: Thus defining a jivanmukta, he is declared to be free
from the bonds of threefold Karmas (sanchita, agami and prarabdha).
The disciple who has reached this stage then relates his personal
experience. The liberated one is free indeed to act as he pleases, and
when he leaves the mortal frame, attains absolution, and returns not
to this “birth which is death”.
Sri Sankara thus describes Realisation that connotes liberation as
twofold, i.e., jivanmukti and videha mukti referred to above. Moreover,
in this short treatise, written in the form of a dialogue between a Guru
and his disciple, he has considered many relevant topics.

Talk 350.
6th February, 1937
While speaking to Mr. G. Shanmugham, a very sincere lawyer devotee,
Bhagavan observed:
The sastras say that one must serve a Guru for 12 years for getting
Self-Realisation. What does Guru do? Does he hand it over to the
disciple? Is not the Self always realised? What does the common
belief mean then? The man is always the Self and yet he does not
know it. He confounds it with the non-self, viz., the body etc.

Such confusion is due to ignorance. If ignorance be wiped out
the confusion will cease to exist and the true knowledge will be
unfolded. By remaining in contact with realised sages the man
gradually loses the ignorance until its removal is complete. The
eternal Self is thus revealed.
This is the meaning conveyed by the story of Ashtavakra and Janaka.
The anecdotes differ in different books. We are not concerned with
the names and the embellishments. The tatva, i.e., the moral, must
not be lost sight of. The disciple surrenders himself to the master. That
means there is no vestige of individuality retained by the disciple. If
the surrender is complete all sense of individuality is lost and there
is thus no cause for misery. The eternal being is only happiness. That
is revealed.
Without understanding it aright, people think that the Guru teaches the
disciple something like “TATVAMASI” and that the disciple realises
“I am Brahman”. In their ignorance they conceive of Brahman as
something more huge and powerful than anything else. With a limited
‘I’ the man is so stuck up and wild. What will be the case if the same
‘I’ grows up enormous? He will be enormously ignorant and foolish!
This false ‘I’ must perish. Its annihilation is the fruit of Guru seva.
Realisation is eternal and it is not newly brought about by the Guru.
He helps in the removal of ignorance. That is all.

Talk 351.
7th February, 1937
Dr. Subramania Iyer, Retired Health Officer of Salem, read out a
passage which contained the instructions that one should know that
the world is transitory, that worldly enjoyments are useless, that one
should therefore turn away in disgust from them, restrain the senses
and meditate on the Self to realise it.
Sri Bhagavan observed: How does one know the world to be transitory?
Unless something permanent is held, the transitory nature of the world
cannot be understood. Because the man is already the Self, and the Self
is the Eternal Reality, his attention is drawn to it; and he is instructed
to rivet his attention on the Eternal Reality, the Self.

Talk 352.

THE DIFFERENT CREEDS
The thought rises up as the subject and object. ‘I’ alone being held,
all else disappears. It is enough, but only to the competent few.
The others argue, “Quite so. The world that exists in my sleep has
existed before my birth and will exist after my death. Do not others
see it? How can the world cease to be if my ego appears not?” The
genesis of the world and the different schools of thought are meant
to satisfy such people.
D.: Nevertheless, being only products of intellect they cannot turn
the mind inward.
M.: Just for this reason the scriptures speak of “in-turned look”,
“one-pointed look” and so on.
The Self being always the Self, why should only a dhira be
illumined? Does it mean a man of courage? No; dhih = intellect;
rah = watch; protection. So dhira is the one who always keeps the
mind inward bent without letting it loose.

Talk 353.
8th February, 1937
D.: What is turiya?
M.: There are three states only, the waking, dream and sleep. Turiya
is not a fourth one; it is what underlies these three. But people do
not readily understand it. Therefore it is said that this is the fourth
state and the only Reality. In fact it is not apart from anything, for
it forms the substratum of all happenings; it is the only Truth; it is
your very Being. The three states appear as fleeting phenomena on
it and then sink into it alone. Therefore they are unreal.
The pictures in a cinema show are only shadows passing over
the screen. They make their appearance; move forward and
backward; change from one to another; are therefore unreal
whereas the screen all along remains unchanged. Similarly
with paintings: the images are unreal and the canvas real. So
also with us: the world-phenomena, within or without, are only

passing phenomena not independent of our Self. Only the habit
of looking on them as being real and located outside ourselves
is responsible for hiding our true being and showing forth the
others. The ever-present only Reality, the Self, being found, all
other unreal things will disappear, leaving behind the knowledge
that they are no other than the Self.
Turiya only another name for the Self. Aware of the waking, dream
and sleep states, we remain unaware of our own Self. Nevertheless
the Self is here and now, it is the only Reality. There is nothing
else. So long as identification with the body lasts the world seems
to lie outside us. Only realise the Self and they are not.
Talk 354.
An American lady, a theosophist, asked: What is the means by which
my approach to my master may be made nearer?
M.: How far away are you now from him?
D.: I am away from him. But I want to get closer to him.
M.: If you first know your Self, you may then find out how far away
the other is. Who are you now? Are you the personality?
D.: Yes, I am the personality.
M.: Is the personality independent of the Self?
D.: Sometimes.
M.: At what times?
D.: I mean I have some flashes of the reality and, at other times, I do
not have them.
M.: Who is aware of those flashes?
D.: I, I mean my personality.
M.: Is this personality aware as being apart from the Self?
D.: Which Self?
M.: Which do you consider the personality to be?
D.: The lower self.
M.: Then I mean to ask if the lower self is aware independently of
the Higher Self?

D.: Yes, at times
M.: Who feels that she is away from the master, just now?
D.: The Higher Self.
M.: Does the Higher Self have a body and say that the master is
away from it? Does it speak through your mouth? Are you apart
from that?
D.: Can you kindly advise me how I can train myself to be aware of
what I do even without the body, as in sleep?
M.: Awareness is your nature. In deep sleep or in waking, it is the
same. How can it be gained afresh?
D.: But I do not remember what and how I did in my sleep.
M.: Who says “I do not remember”?
D.: I say now.
M.: You were the same then; why do you not say so in sleep?
D.: I do not remember what I say in sleep.
M.: You say, “I know, I remember”, in the wakeful state. This same
personality says “I did not know - I did not remember in sleep”.
Why does not this question arise in sleep?
D.: I do not know what happens in sleep. That is the reason I ask
now.
M.: The question affects the sleeping phase and must be raised there.
It does not affect the waking phase and there is no apparent reason
for this question.
The fact is that you have no limitations in sleep and no question
arises. Whereas now you put on limitations, identify yourself with
the body and questions of this kind arise.
D.: I understand it, but do not realise it (i.e. unity in variety).
M.: Because you are in variety, you say you understand unity - that you
have flashes, etc., remember things, etc.; you consider this variety
to be real. On the other hand Unity is the reality, and the variety is
false. The variety must go before unity reveals itself - its reality.
It is always real. It does not send flashes of its being in this false
variety. On the contrary, this variety obstructs the truth.
Then some others pursued the conversation.

M.: Removal of ignorance is the aim of practice, and not acquisition of
Realisation. Realisation is ever present, here and now. Were it to be
acquired anew, Realisation must be understood to be absent at one
time and present at another time. In that case, it is not permanent,
and therefore not worth the attempt. But Realisation is permanent
and eternal and is here and now.
D.: Grace is necessary for the removal of ignorance.
M.: Certainly. But Grace is all along there. Grace is the Self. It is
not something to be acquired. All that is necessary is to know its
existence. For example, the sun is brightness only. He does not
see darkness. Whereas others speak of darkness fleeing away on
the sun approaching. Similarly, ignorance also is a phantom and
not real. Because of its unreality, its unreal nature being found, it
is said to be removed.
Again, the sun is there and also bright. You are surrounded by
sunlight. Still if you would know the sun you must turn your eyes
in his direction and look at him. So also Grace is found by practice
alone although it is here and now.
D.: By the desire to surrender constantly, increasing Grace is
experienced, I hope.
M.: Surrender once for all and be done with the desire. So long as
the sense of doership is retained there is the desire; that is also
personality. If this goes the Self is found to shine forth pure.
The sense of doership is the bondage and not the actions
themselves.
“Be still and know that I am God.” Here stillness is total surrender
without a vestige of individuality. Stillness will prevail and there
will be no agitation of mind. Agitation of mind is the cause of
desire, the sense of doership and personality. If that is stopped
there is quiet. There ‘Knowing’ means ‘Being’. It is not the relative
knowledge involving the triads, knowledge, subject and object.
D.: Is the thought “I am God” or “I am the Supreme Being” helpful?
M.: “I am that I am.” “I am” is God - not thinking, “I am God”. Realise
“I am” and do not think I am. “Know I am God” - it is said, and
not “Think I am God.”

Later Sri Bhagavan continued: It is said “I AM that I AM”. That
means a person must abide as the ‘I’. He is always the ‘I’ alone.
He is nothing else. Yet he asks “Who am I?” A victim of illusion
would ask “Who am I?” and not a man fully aware of himself.
The wrong identity of the Self with the non-self makes you ask,
“Who am I?”
Later still: There are different routes to Tiruvannamalai, but
Tiruvannamalai is the same by whichever route it is gained. Similarly
the approach to the subject varies according to the personality. Yet
the Self is the same. But still, being in Tiruvannamalai, if one asks
for the route it is ridiculous. So also, being the Self, if one asks
how to realise the Self it looks absurd. You are the Self. Remain
as the Self. That is all. The questions arise because of the present
wrong identification of the Self with the body. That is ignorance.
This must go. On its removal the Self alone is.
Talk 355.
D.: Does not education make a sage more useful to the world than
illiteracy?
M.: Even a learned man must bow before the illiterate sage.
Illiteracy is ignorance: education is learned ignorance. Both of
them are ignorant of their true aim; whereas a sage is not ignorant
because there is no aim for him.
Talk 356.
D.: Why should there be sleep in the world?
M.: Owing to sin only.
D.: Can it be destroyed?
M.: Yes.
D.: It ends only after making itself felt, they say.
M.: Why then devotion to God?
D.: How can sleep be destroyed?
M.: Be not aware of its activities and effects.
D.: How can it be done?
M.: Only by enquiry of the Self.

Talk 357.

REMINISCENCES
Sri Bhagavan was recounting some of the incidents of His stay in
Tiruvannamalai:
1. He was one day given a small speck of some substance on a leaf,
to be licked off. It was said to be a good help for digestion. He licked
it. Later He had His meal. After some time, the assembled persons
appeared to be surrounded by Light (tejomaya). The experience passed
away after some time.
2. While He was living in Pavalakunru. He intended to have a bath
in one of the rills on the hillside. Palaniswami was informed of it.
The news spread, that Jada Padmanabhaswami, who was living on
the Hill, had arranged with Palaniswami to take Sri Bhagavan to the
hill near his cottage. Palaniswami, without informing Sri Bhagavan,
managed to take Him there. A great reception awaited Him. A seat
was arranged for Him, milk and fruits were offered and J. P. waited
on Him with great kindness.
3. J.P., though represented in the book Self-Realisation as having sought
to injure Sri Bhagavan, was really kind to Him and his pranks were
misunderstood to be acts of malice. His only weakness was that he
wanted to make capital out of Sri Bhagavan for raising funds; which, of
course, the Maharshi did not like. There was nothing wrong with J.P.
4. Madhavaswami, the attendant, asked if Sri Bhagavan remained
without food for months in the underground cellar in the temple.
M.: Um! - Um! - food was forthcoming - Milk, fruits - but whoever
thought of food.
5. While staying in the mango-tree cave Sri Bhagavan used to string
garlands for the images in the temple, with lotuses, yellow flowers
(sarakonnai) and green leaves.
6. After the completion of the Kalyanamantapam Sri Bhagavan had
stayed there one night in disguise.
7. When He was sitting under a tree in the temple compound He was
covered with dirt, for He never used to bathe. In the cold nights of

December He used to fold up the legs, place his head between his legs
and remain there without moving. Early in the morning the layer of
dirt on His body was soaked with dew and mist and appeared white.
After drying up in the sun it appeared dark.
8. When living on the Hill Sri Bhagavan used to help in the pooja of
J. P., ringing the bell, washing the vessels, etc., all along remaining
silent. He also used to read medical works, e.g., Ashtanga Hridayam
in Malayalam and point out the treatment contained in the book for
the patients who sought the other sadhu’s help. That sadhu did not
himself know how to read these works.

Talk 358.
12th February, 1937

A SCENE IN THE HALL
It is 8-20 p.m. Sri Bhagavan has returned after supper and stretched
Himself on the sofa. The light is dim; there are three men sitting on the
floor; one is busy copying something from a journal; another is wrapt in
meditation; and the third is looking around, having nothing to do. The
hall is silent but for occasional clearing of the throat by Sri Bhagavan.
Madhavaswami, the attendant devotee, slips in noiselessly with a sheaf of
betels in hand. He moves to the table. Sri Bhagavan who is reclining on the
sofa, sees him and calls out, yet kindly; “Sh, Sh; what are you doing?”
The attendant softly murmurs, “Nothing”, leaves the betel there and
fumbles hesitatingly.
M.: “I do not want it.” (The attendant softly settles down on the floor).
Sri Bhagavan: “Kasturi Pill - one after another, every day. The bottle
will be empty - and more is ordered. I don’t want it.”
A devotee skilfully blames the olla podrida () of the
day-meal for the indifferent health of Sri Bhagavan.
M.: “No - no - It was well made. It was good.” silence, but for expectoration
and eructation. After a few minutes, the attendant slips out and returns
with a bottle in hand, goes near Sri Bhagavan and stretches out a pill
saying: “Cummin seed-pill”. Sri Bhagavan softly murmurs, “It contains

lime juice: lime juice is not good for this.” One devotee Rangaswamy
Iyengar has in the meantime become wide awake from his meditation
and looks on. The attendant is still holding out his hand with the pill.
Sri Bhagavan continues: “Who is to munch it?”
Rangaswamy Iyengar: “It need not be munched. It may be kept in
the mouth and sucked.” The attendant hastily agrees. “Yes - yes it
is only to be sucked.”
M.: “Give it to him” pointing to Rangaswami Iyengar. “Let him munch
it or suck it. I do not want it.”
The attendant returns disappointed and squats on the floor; again rises up.
M.: “Eh! - Eh! What do you do? I do not want.” The attendant moves up
to the medicine chest, murmuring “Kasturi pill - it will be effective”. Sri
Bhagavan: “I shall soon be right even without it. Do not take it out. Eh!
- Eh! - keep it there - I won’t take it - do what you like.” The attendant
again settles down and all remain silent before retiring to bed.

Talk 359.
13th February, 1937
At about 7-30 a.m. Sri Bhagavan was climbing up the hill after
breakfast. Padananda went and prostrated, stood up and said, “All
right, I have had darsan ... I shall return.”
Sri Bhagavan smilingly, “Whose darsan? Why don’t you say that
you gave darsan to me?”
At about 9 a.m. a devotee from Poona (Mr. Parkhi) saluted Sri
Bhagavan and read out his ashtaka praying to Sri Bhagavan for
Grace. The piece finishes with a prayer for quick liberation (jhatiti
mukti) and the devotee emphasised it.
M.: Mukti, i.e., liberation, is not to be gained hereafter. It is there for
ever, here and now.
D.: I agree, but I do not experience it.
M.: The experience is here and now. One cannot deny one’s own
self.
D.: That means existence and not happiness.

M.: Existence = happiness = Being. The word mukti (liberation) is so
provoking. Why should one seek it? He believes that there is bondage
and therefore seeks liberation. But the fact is that there is no bondage
but only liberation. Why call it by a name and seek it?
D.: True, but we are ignorant.
M.: Only remove ignorance. That is all there is to be done.

Talk 360.
14th February, 1937
The aristocratic gentleman from Lucknow has written to Mr. Paul
Brunton that his wife has since lost that peace of mind which she had
gained by her visits to Sri Bhagavan; so he desires that Sri Bhagavan
may be pleased to restore the same peace.
When requested, Sri Bhagavan said, “It is due to weakness of mind
that peace once gained is later lost.”
Talk 361.
Mudaliar Swami, son of the lady who brings bhiksha every day to Sri
Bhagavan, related the following interesting incident:
During the time Sri Bhagavan was staying in Virupaksha Cave, Sri Bhagavan
and Mudaliar Swami were walking together behind the Skandasramam site.
There was a huge rock about 15 feet high; it was a cleft, a girl (a shepherdess)
was standing there crying. Sri Bhagavan asked the reason of her sorrow.
She said, “A sheep of mine has slipped into this cleft; so I am crying.” Sri
Bhagavan descended into the cleft, took the sheep on his shoulders, climbed
up to the surface and delivered the sheep to her. Mudaliar Swami says that
it was a very remarkable feat for any human being.
Talk 362.
Mr Subbaramiah, a college professor from Nellore, asked about mukti.
M.: All questions relating to mukti are inadmissible; because mukti
means release from bondage which implies the present existence
of bondage. There is no bondage and therefore no mukti either.
D.: The sastras speak of it and its grades.

M.: The sastras are not meant for the wise because they do not need
them; the ignorant do not want them. Only the mumukshus look up
to the sastras. That means that the sastras are neither for wisdom
nor for ignorance.
D.: Vasishta is said to be a jivanmukta whereas Janaka was a
videhamukta.
M.: Why speak of Vasishta or Janaka? What about oneself?
There were many new visitors this day. Two of them were speaking
of Ganapati Muni in Sri Bhagavan’s presence. Sri Bhagavan put
in a few words in their talk:
(1) Some say that jnana and upasana are the two wings with which
to fly to mukti. What is jnana? What is upasana? Jnana is ever
present. That is the ultimate goal also. When an effort is made the
effort is called upasana; when it is effortless it is jnana, which is
the same as mukti.
(2) After some discussion among themselves, a visitor said: Some
Superior Power must help us to shake off the externalities.
Sri Bhagavan said: Who sees the externalities? Or do they say that
they exist? If so let the world say that it exists.
Again, if the world is a projection from the interior it must be
recognised that it is projected simultaneously with the ‘I-thought’.
Either way the ‘I’ is the fundamental basis knowing which all else
is known.
(3) Another said that Ganapati Muni used to say that he could even
go to Indra-loka and say what Indra was doing but he could not go
within and find the ‘I’.
Sri Bhagavan added that Ganapati Muni used to say that it was easy
to move forward but impossible to move backward.
Then Sri Bhagavan remarked: However far one goes there he is.
Where is moving backward? The same truth is contained in the
mantra in Isa-Upanishad.
(4) In reply to a query how Ganapati Muni became an asu kavi
(inspired poet), Sri Bhagavan said; It is said that while he was
making tapasya Siva appeared and gave him milk or honey to
drink, after which he became asu kavi.

Talk 363.
20th February, 1937
A European civilian, Mr. Dodwell, Deputy Secretary, Finance, Madras
Government, arrived with his wife before 1 p.m. and stayed in the
hall till about 3-30 p.m.
The lady asked: The spiritual leaders in the West say that the spiritual
centre is in India. Is there any contact among the spiritual leaders in India?
Or is contact possible between the leaders of the East and the West?
M.: What do you mean by spiritual centre?
D.: The spiritual centre is the seat of spiritual leaders.
M.: What do you understand by ‘spiritual leaders’?
D.: In the West there is a crisis. Scientific knowledge is far advanced.
Such knowledge is used for generating destructive forces. There
is a movement for making them constructive. When thus diverted
it will be for the good of the world. The leaders of this movement
are the redeemers.
M.: By ‘spiritual leaders’ we understand those who are ‘spiritual’ as
opposed to ‘physical’. Spirit is unlimited and formless. Such too is
the spiritual centre. There is only one such centre. Whether in the
West or in the East the centre cannot differ; nor has it any locality.
Being unlimited it includes the leaders, the men, the world, the forces
of destruction and of construction. There is no differentiation. You
speak of contact because you are thinking of the embodied beings as
spiritual leaders. The spiritual men are not bodies; they are not aware
of their bodies. They are only spirit, limitless and formless. There is
always unity among them and all others; nay, they comprise all.
The spirit is the Self. If the Self is realised, these questions cannot
arise at all.
Mrs. Jinarajadasa from Adyar: Self Realisation sounds so easy, but
yet is so difficult in practice.
M.: What can be easier? The Self is more intimate than anything
else. If that cannot be realised, is it easy to realise what is apart
and farther away?

D.: Self Realisation is so illusory. How can it be made permanent?
M.: The Self can never be illusory. It is the only Reality. That which
appears will also disappear and is therefore impermanent. The Self
never appears and disappears and is therefore permanent.
D.: Yes - true. You know that, in the Theosophical Society, they
meditate to seek the masters to guide them.
M.: The Master is within. Meditation is meant for the removal of
ignorance, of the wrong idea that he is without. If he be a stranger
whose advent you await he is bound to disappear also. Where is
the use of transient being like that?
However, as long as you think that you are an individual or that
you are the body, so long the master also is necessary and he will
appear with a body. When this wrong identification ceases the
master will be found to be the Self.
There is a stanza in Kaivalya:
“My Lord! You had remained as my Self within, protecting me in
all my past incarnations. Now, by your Grace, you have manifested
yourself as my master and revealed yourself as the Self “.
Just see what happens in sleep. There is no ego, no India, no seekers,
no master, etc.; and yet you are - and happy too.
The ego, India, seekers, etc., appear now; but they are not apart
from nor independent of you.
There was a large group of visitors on account of the election
holidays and some of these also joined in the discussion.
One of them asked about reincarnation.
M.: Reincarnation can only be so long as there is ignorance. There
is no incarnation either now, nor was there before, nor will be
hereafter. This is the truth.
D.: What is the ego-self?
M.: The ego-self appears and disappears and is transitory, whereas the
real Self always abides permanent. Though you are actually the true
Self yet you wrongly identify the real Self with the ego-self.
D.: How does the mistake come about?
M.: See if it has come about.

D.: One has to sublimate the ego-self into the true Self.
M.: The ego-self does not exist at all.
D.: Why does it give us trouble?
M.: To whom is the trouble? The trouble also is imagined. Trouble
and pleasure are only for the ego.
D.: Why is the world so wrapped up in ignorance?
M.: Take care of yourself. Let the world take care of itself. See your
Self. If you are the body there is the gross world also. If you are
spirit all is spirit alone.
D.: It will hold good for the individual, but what of the rest?
M.: Do it first and then see if the question arises afterwards.
D.: Is there avidya?
M.: For whom is it?
D.: For the ego-self.
M.: Yes, for the ego. Remove the ego; avidya is gone. Look for it,
the ego vanishes. The real Self alone remains. The ego professing
avidya is not to be seen. There is no avidya in reality. All sastras
are meant to disprove the existence of avidya.
D.: How did the ego arise?
M.: Ego is not. Otherwise do you admit of two selves? How can there
be avidya in the absence of the ego? If you begin to enquire, the
avidya which is already non-existent, will be found not to be or
you will say it has fled away.
Ignorance pertains to the ego. Why do you think of the ego and also
suffer? What is ignorance again? It is that which is non-existent.
However the worldly life requires the hypothesis of avidya.
Avidya is only our ignorance and nothing more. It is ignorance or
forgetfulness of the Self. Can there be darkness before the Sun?
Similarly, can there be ignorance before the Self-evident and Self-luminous Self?
If you know the Self there will be no darkness, no
ignorance and no misery.
It is the mind which feels the trouble, misery, etc. Darkness never
comes nor goes. See the Sun and there is no darkness. Similarly,
see the Self and avidya will be found not to exist.

D.: Sri Ramakrishna and others practised concentration.
M.: Concentration and all other practices are meant for recognising the
absence, i.e., non-existence of ignorance. No one can deny his own
being. Being is knowledge, i.e., awareness. That awareness implies
absence of ignorance. Therefore everyone naturally admits non-existence of ignorance.
And yet why should he suffer? Because he
thinks he is this or that. That is wrong. “I am” alone is; and not “I am
so and so”, or “I am such and such”. When existence is absolute it is
right; when it is particularised it is wrong. That is the whole truth.
See how each one admits that he is. Does he look into a mirror to
know his being? His awareness makes him admit his existence or
being. But he confuses it with the body, etc. Why should he do so?
Is he aware of his body in his sleep? No; yet he himself does not
cease to be in sleep. He exists there though without the body. How
does he know that he exists in sleep? Does he require a mirror to
reveal his own being now? Only be aware, and your being is clear
in your awareness.
D.: How is one to know the Self?
M.: “Knowing the Self” means “Being the Self”. Can you say that
you do not know the Self? Though you cannot see your own eyes
and though not provided with a mirror to look in, do you deny
the existence of your eyes? Similarly, you are aware of the Self
even though the Self is not objectified. Or, do you deny your Self
because it is not objectified? When you say “I cannot know the
Self” it means absence in terms of relative knowledge, because you
have been so accustomed to relative knowledge that you identify
yourself with it. Such wrong identity has forged the difficulty of
not knowing the obvious Self because it cannot be objectified; and
you ask. “How is one to know the Self?” Your difficulty is centred
in “How”? Who is to know the Self? Can the body know it?
Let the body answer. Who says that the body is perceived now?
In order to meet this kind of ignorance the sastras formulate the
theory of God’s leela or krida (i.e., play). God is said to emanate
as the mind, the senses and the body and to play. Who are you to
say that this play is a trouble to you? Who are you to question the
doings of God?

Your duty is to be: and not to be this or that. “I AM that I AM” sums
up the whole truth. The method is summed up in “BE STILL”. What
does “stillness” mean? It means “destroy yourself”. Because any
form or shape is the cause of trouble. Give up the notion that “I am
so and so”. Our sastras say: ahamiti sphurati (it shines as ‘I’).
D.: What is sphurana (shining)?
M.: (Aham, aham) ‘I-I’ is the Self; (Aham idam) “I am this” or “I
and that” is the ego. Shining is there always. The ego is transitory;
When the ‘I’ is kept up as ‘I’ alone it is the Self; when it flies at a
tangent and says “this” it is the ego.
D.: Is God apart from the Self?
M.: The Self is God. “I AM” is God. “I am the Self, O Gudakesa!”
(Ahamatma Gudakesa).
This question arises because you are holding the ego self. This will
not arise if you hold the True Self. For the Real Self will not and
cannot ask anything. If God be apart from the Self He must be a
Self-less God, which is absurd.
D.: What is namaskara (prostration)?
M.: Prostration means “subsidence of the ego”. What is “subsidence”?
To merge into the source of its origin. God cannot be deceived by
outward genuflexions, bowings and prostrations. He sees if the
individuality is there or not.
Mr. Shamanna: Is there a sixth sense to feel “I AM”?
M.: Do you have it in your sleep? There is only one being functioning
through the five senses. Or do you mean that each sense is independent
of the Self and there are five selves admitting of a sixth to control them?
There is a power working through these five senses. How can you deny
the existence of such Power? Do you deny your existence? Do you not
remain even in sleep where the body is not perceived? The same ‘I’
continues to be now; so we admit our existence, whether there is the
body or not. The senses work periodically. Their work begins and ends.
There must be a substratum on which their activities depend. Where
do they appear and merge? There must be a single substratum. Were
you to say that the single unit is not perceived, it is an admission of its
being single: for you say that there is no second one to know it.

All these discussions are only to get rid of ignorance. When that is done
everything will be clear. It is a matter of competence, or ripeness.
D.: Cannot Grace hasten such competence in a seeker?
M.: Leave it to Him. Surrender unreservedly. One of two things
must be done. Either surrender because you admit your inability
and also require a High Power to help you; or investigate into the
cause of misery, go into the source and merge into the Self. Either
way you will be free from misery. God never forsakes one who
has surrendered. Mamekam saranam vraja.
D.: What is the drift of the mind after surrender?
M.: Is the surrendered mind raising the question? (Laughter.)
Talk 364.
The Nellore Professor asked about visvarupa darsana.
M.: Visvatma darsana is visvarupa darsana i.e., the universal Self of the
cosmic Self is the cosmos. Sri Krishna started the discourse in Chapter
II, saying, “I have no form”. In Chapter XI, He says, “See my form as
the Universe”. Is it consistent? Again he says, “I transcend the three
worlds”, but Arjuna sees the three worlds in Him. Sri Krishna says,
“I cannot be seen by men, Gods, etc.”; yet Arjuna sees himself and
the Gods in Him. No one could see and yet Arjuna was endowed with
divine sight to see Him. Does it not look a maze of contradictions?
The answer is that the understanding is wrong. Sthula dristi on the
physical plane is absurd. Jnana dristi (subtle understanding) is
necessary. That is why Arjuna was given divya chakshuh (divine
sight). Can such sight be gross? Will such interpretation lead you
to a right understanding?
Sri Krishna says Kalosmi, ‘I am Time’. Does Time have shape?
Again if the universe be His form should it not be one and
unchanging? Why does He say to Arjuna, “See in me whatever
you desire to see?” That means that His form is according to the
desires of the seer. They speak of ‘divine sight’ and yet paint the
scene, each according to his own view. There is the seer also in the
seen. What is all this? Even a mesmerist can make you see strange
scenes. You call this a trick, whereas the other you call divine. Why
this difference? Anything seen cannot be real. That is the truth.

Talk 365.
As Sri Bhagavan was continuing in the same strain, a visitor asked
how to overcome the identity of the Self with the body.
M.: What about sleep?
D.: There is ignorance prevailing.
M.: How do you know your ignorance in sleep? Did you exist in
sleep, or not?
D.: I do not know.
M.: Do you deny your existence in sleep?
D.: I must admit it by my reasoning.
M.: How do you infer your existence?
D.: By reasoning and experience.
M.: Is reasoning necessary for experience? (Laughter)
D.: Is meditation analytical or synthetic?
M.: Analysis or synthesis are in the region of intellect. The Self
transcends the intellect.
Talk 366.
Before leaving at 3-30 p.m., Mrs. Dodwell raised a second question,
asking what is meant by neti-neti.
M.: There is now wrong identification of the Self with the body,
senses, etc. You proceed to discard these, and this is neti. This
can be done only by holding to the one which cannot be discarded.
That is iti alone.

Talk 367.
21st February, 1937
A Marathi lady, a casual visitor then taking leave, was almost on the
point of bursting into tears; she asked; I know that mukti is impossible
in one life. Still may I not have peace of mind in this life?
The Master looked at her very kindly and said smiling softly: Life and
all else are in Brahman alone. Brahman is here and now. Investigate.

D.: I am practising meditation for a number of years. Yet my mind is
not steady and cannot be brought to bear on meditation.
M.: Again looked steadily at her and said: “Do it now and all will
be right.”
Talk 368.
A young girl of 9 or 10, whose mother is a Research Scholar in Sanskrit
in the University of Madras, accompanied by Mr. Maurice Frydman
met Sri Bhagavan in Palakothu at about 12 noon. Sri Bhagavan, as
usual with Him, kindly smiled on her. She asked Sri Bhagavan: “Why
is there misery on earth?”
M.: Due to Karma.
D.: Who makes Karma bear fruits?
M.: God.
D.: God makes us do Karma and gives bad fruits for bad Karma. Is
it fair?
Sri Bhagavan almost laughed and was very pleased with her. Later
he was coaxing her to read something on returning to the hall. Since
then He is watching her.

Talk 369.
22nd February, 1937
A Marathi gentleman and wife, past middle age, are on a visit here.
They are quiet and simple. Both of them tearfully took leave and the
gentleman even sobbed out a prayer for Sri Bhagavan’s Grace. Sri
Bhagavan gazed at them, with his lips parted showing the row of
white teeth. His eyes also had a tear in them.
Talk 370.
Sri Bhagavan was in the cattle-shed. People were working and
he watched their work for a short time. Then someone came and
said that a large number of visitors were waiting in the hall. Sri
Bhagavan in His calm way said: “Yes - yes, you do your work. Let
Me go for Mine. People are waiting for Me. Let Me go.” - Then
he left the place.

Talk 371.
23rd February, 1937
There was a group of three middle-aged Andhras on a visit to
Sri Bhagavan. One of them kneeled and asked: I am performing
hathayoga, namely basti, dhauti, neti, etc. I find a blood vessel
hardened in the ankle. Is it a result of Yoga?
M.: The blood-vessel would have hardened under any circumstances. It
does not trouble you as much now as it would otherwise. Hathayoga
is a cleaning process. It also helps peace of mind, after leading you
to pranayama.
D.: May I do pranayama? Is it useful?
M.: Pranayama is an aid for the control of mind. Only you should
not stop with pranayama. You must proceed further to pratyahara,
dharana, dhyana and samadhi. Full results are reaped finally.
Another of the group asked: How are lust, anger, acquisitiveness,
confusion, pride and jealousy overcome?
M.: By dhyana.
D.: What is dhyana?
M.: Dhyana is holding on to a single thought and putting off all other
thoughts.
D.: What is to be meditated upon?
M.: Anything that you prefer.
D.: Siva, Vishnu, and Gayatri are said to be equally efficacious. Which
should I meditate upon?
M.: Any one you like best. They are all equal in their effect. But you
should stick to one.
D.: How to meditate?
M.: Concentrate on that one whom you like best. If a single thought
prevails, all other thoughts are put off and finally eradicated. So
long as diversity prevails there are bad thoughts. When the object
of love prevails only good thoughts hold the field. Therefore hold
on to one thought only. Dhyana is the chief practice.

A little later Sri Bhagavan continued:
Dhyana means fight. As soon as you begin meditation other
thoughts will crowd together, gather force and try to sink the single
thought to which you try to hold. The good thought must gradually
gain strength by repeated practice. After it has grown strong the
other thoughts will be put to flight.
This is the battle royal always taking place in meditation.
One wants to rid oneself of misery. It requires peace of mind, which
means absence of perturbation owing to all kinds of thoughts.
Peace of mind is brought about by dhyana alone.
D.: What is the need then for pranayama?
M.: Pranayama is meant for one who cannot directly control the
thoughts. It serves as a brake to a car. But one should not stop with
it, as I said before, but must proceed to pratyahara, dharana and
dhyana. After the fruition of dhyana, the mind will come under
control even in the absence of pranayama.
The asanas (postures) help pranayama, which helps dhyana in its
turn, and peace of mind results. Here is the purpose of hatha yoga.
Later Sri Bhagavan continued:
When dhyana is well established it cannot be given up. It will
go on automatically even when you are engaged in work, play or
enjoyment. It will persist in sleep too.
Dhyana must become so deep-rooted that it will be natural to one.
D.: What rite or action is necessary for the development of dhyana?
M.: Dhyana is itself the action, the rite and the effort. It is the most
intense and potent of all. No other effort is necessary.
D.: Is not japa necessary?
M.: Is dhyana not vak (speech)? Why is japa necessary for it? If
dhyana is gained there is no need for anything else.
D.: Is not a vow of silence helpful?
M.: A vow is only a vow. It may help dhyana to some extent. But what
is the good of keeping the mouth closed and letting the mind run riot.
If the mind be engaged in dhyana, where is the need for speech?

Nothing is as good as dhyana. Should one take to action with a
vow of silence, where is the good of the vow?
D.: What is jnana-marga?
M.: I have been saying it for so long. What is jnana? Jnana means
realisation of the Truth. It is done by dhyana. Dhyana helps you
to hold on to Truth to the exclusion of all thoughts.
D.: Why are there so many Gods mentioned?
M.: The body is only one. Still, how many functions are performed
by it? The source of all the functions is only one. It is in the same
way with the Gods also.
D.: Why does a man suffer misery?
M.: Misery is due to multifarious thoughts. If the thoughts are unified
and centred on a single item there is no misery, but happiness is
the result. Then, even the thought, “I do something” is absent; nor
will there be an eye on the fruit of action.
Talk 372.
D.: Horripilation, sobbing voice, joyful tears, etc., are mentioned in
Atma Vidya Vilasa and other works. Are these found in samadhi,
or before, or after?
M.: All these are the symptoms of exceedingly subtle modes of mind
(vrittis). Without duality they cannot remain. Samadhi is Perfect
Peace where these cannot find place. After emerging from samadhi
the remembrance of the state gives rise to these symptoms.
In bhakti marga (path of devotion) these are the precursors to
samadhi.
D.: Are they not so in the path of jnana?
M.: May be. There is no definiteness about it. It depends on the nature
of the individual. Individuality entirely lost, these cannot find a
place. Even the slightest trace of it being present, these symptoms
become manifest.
Manickavachagar and other saints have spoken of these symptoms.
They say tears rush forth involuntarily and irrepressibly. Though
aware of tears they are unable to repress them.

I had the same experience when I was staying Virupaksha cave.
D.: Sleep state is said to be the experience of Bliss, yet, on recollecting
it the hairs do not stand on end. Why should they do so, if the
samadhi state is recollected?
M.: Samadhi means sleep in waking state (jagrat sushupti). Bliss
is overpowering and the experience is very clear, whereas it is
different in sleep.
D.: Can we put it that in sleep there is no unhappiness, nor happiness,
i.e., the experience is negative not positive.
M.: But the recollection is positive “I slept happily,” says the man.
So there must be the experience of happiness in sleep.
D.: Does Bliss consist only in the absence of unhappiness, or is it
anything positive?
M.: It is positive. Loss of unhappiness and rise of happiness are
simultaneous.
D.: Can it be that the recollection of happiness in sleep is not clear
and so there is no horripilation, etc.?
M.: The Bliss of samadhi is a perfectly clear experience and its recollection
also is similar. But the experience of sleep is otherwise.

Talk 373.
28th February, 1937
H. H. The Maharajah of Mysore had a private interview with Sri
Bhagavan in the newly built bathroom from 9-15 to 9-30 a.m. His
Highness saluted Sri Bhagavan placing his head on Sri Bhagavan’s
feet and said:
I have read Sri Bhagavan’s life and long had a desire to meet Him,
but my circumstances are such that intentions of this kind cannot
easily be carried into effect. Nor can I stay here as other disciples
can, considering all my limitations. While I remain here for about 15
minutes, I shall now pray only for Thy Grace.
(On departure H. H. again saluted Sri Bhagavan as before and left
after presenting two fine shawls and some money to the office).

Talk 374.
13th March, 1937
H. H. The Maharajah of Travancore had an interview from 4-30 p.m.
to 5-15 p.m.
Their Highnesses The Maharajah and the Maharani of Travancore who
arrived at Tiruvannamalai by the 8 a.m., train visited the Asramam at 4-15
p.m. The public were excluded from the hall where Bhagavan sat. Even
devotees who were daily visiting the hall were by a sad mistake excluded from
the interview. The Royal party was introduced to Sri Bhagavan by a retired
District Magistrate. Two aides-de-camp, the Private Secretary to H. H. The
Maharajah, some officials of the Travancore State and an Advocate of
Mylapore were present. The discussion started by the District Magistrate
went on about manas, concentration, Realisation, purpose of creation, etc.
Her Highness put some questions expressing her doubts and they were
all explained by Sri Bhagavan. H. H. The Maharajah also took part in the
discussion. The whole conversation was in Tamil and Malayalam.
During the visit of the Royal Family of Travancore, Her Highness
appeared very cultured, vivacious and conversant with Malayalam,
Tamil and English. Most of the questions were put by Her Highness.
One of the questions was:
D.: What is the purpose of creation?
M.: It is to give rise to this question; investigate the answer to this
question, and finally abide in the supreme or rather the primal
source of all, including the Self. The investigation will resolve itself
into one of quest for the Self and cease only after the non-self is
sifted away and the Self realised in its purity and glory.
D.: How is the investigation to start?
M.: The Self is plain to all and the starting also equally plain.
D.: What is the starting point for one in my stage of development.
M.: Each one has some method of upasana or japa. If that is pursued
in all sincerity with due perseverance, it will automatically lead to
the investigation of the Self.
[The writer of these notes was not present and the above was gathered
from one of the attendants of Sri Maharshi.]

Talk 375.
21st March, 1937
A middle-aged Kanarese visitor asked about akarma (actionless act).
M.: Whatever one does after the ego has vanished is akarma.
Talk 376.
A learned Telugu visitor, who had composed a song in praise of Sri
Bhagavan, read it out, placed it at His feet and saluted. After a time
he asked for upadesa.
M.: The upadesa is contained in Upadesa Saram.
D.: But oral and personal instruction is valuable.
M.: If there be anything new and hitherto unknown upadesa will be
appropriate. Here it happens to be stilling the mind and remaining
free from thoughts.
D.: It looks impossible.
M.: But it is precisely the pristine and eternal state of all.
D.: It is not perceived in our everyday active life.
M.: Everyday life is not divorced from the Eternal State. So long as
the daily life is imagined to be different from the spiritual life these
difficulties arise. If the spiritual life is rightly understood, the active
life will be found to be not different from it.
Can the mind be got at by the mind on looking for it as an object?
The source of the mental functions must be sought and gained.
That is the Reality.
One does not know the Self owing to the interference of thoughts.
The Self is realised when thoughts subside.
D.: “Only one in a million pursues sadhanas to completion.” (Bh.
Gita, VII, 3).
M.: “Whenever the turbulent mind wavers, then and there pull it and
bring it under control.” (Bh. Gita, VI, 26.) “Seeing the mind with
the mind” (manasa mana alokya), so proclaim the Upanishads.
D.: Is the mind an upadhi (limiting adjunct)?
M.: Yes.

D.: Is the seen (drisya) world real (satya)?
M.: It is true in the same degree as the seer (drashta), subject, object
and perception form the triad (triputi). There is a reality beyond these
three. These appear and disappear, whereas the truth is eternal.
D.: These triputi sambhava are only temporal.
M.: Yes, if one recognises the Self even in temporal matters these
will be found to be non-existent, rather inseparate from the Self;
and they will be going on at the same time.

Talk 377.
22nd March, 1937
A middle-aged Andhra visitor: A man is said to be divine. Why then
does he have regrets?
M.: Divinity refers to the essential nature. The regrets are of
Prakriti.
D.: How is one to overcome regrets?
M.: By realising the Divinity in him.
D.: How?
M.: By practice.
D.: What kind of practice?
M.: Meditation.
D.: Mind is not steady while meditating.
M.: It will be all right by practice.
D.: How is the mind to be steadied?
M.: By strengthening it.
D.: How to strengthen it?
M.: It grows strong by satsanga (the company of the wise).
D.: Shall we add prayers, etc.?
M.: Yes.
D.: What of the one who has no regrets?
M.: He is an accomplished Yogi. There is no question about him.
D.: People cite disasters, e.g., earthquakes, famines, etc., to disprove
God. How shall we meet their contention?

M.: Wherefrom have they come - those who argue?
D.: They say, “Nature”.
M.: Some call it “Nature” - others “God”.
D.: Are we to keep anything against a rainy day; or to live a precarious
life for spiritual attainments?
M.: God looks after everything.

Talk 378.
27th March, 1937
In a conversation with an Andhra visitor, Sri Bhagavan quoted:
Asamsayam mahabaho mano durnigraham chalam
Abhyasena tu kaunteya vairagyena cha grhyate
— Bh. Gita, Ch. VI, 35
Without doubt, O mighty-armed Hero,
the mind is restless, hard to curb.
Yet by constant effort, Partha,
matched with detachment - curbed it is.
To explain vairagya Sri Bhagavan again quoted:
Sankalpaprabhavan kamams tyaktva sarvan aseshatah
Manasaivendriyagramam viniyamya samantatah
— (Ch. VI, 24)
Having cast out without remains
all longing born of thought for self,
Having drawn in by mind alone
his team of senses from all sides As for practice (abhyasa):
Sanaissanairuparamet buddhya dhritigrhitaya
Atmasamstham manah krtva na kinchidapi chintayet
— (VI - 25)
By slow approaches let him come
to rest, with patient, rock-poised Will;
His mind at home in Selfhood pure,
Let him create no thought at all.

Again for jnana:
Yato yato nischarati manas chanchalam asthiram
Tatastato niyamyaitad atmanyeva vasam nayet
— (VI - 26)
Though over and over the fickle mind,
all restlessness, a-wandering goes,
Still over and over let his regain
control, and poise it back in Self.

Talk 379.
2nd April, 1937
One Tirumalpad of Nilambur, a Malayali gentleman, asked Sri Bhagavan
for an explanation of Atma Vidya. (Knowledge of the Self.)
M.: Sri Bhagavan explained this short piece of 5 stanzas as follows:
Chidambaram is the famous place of pilgrimage associated
with Nandanar who sang that Atma Vidya is most difficult of
attainment. Muruganar (a long-standing devotee of Sri Bhagavan)
began however that Atma Vidya is the easiest of attainments. Ayye
atisulabham is the burden of the song.
In explanation of this extraordinary statement, he argued that Atma
being the Self is eternally obvious even to the least of men. The
original statement and the subsequent reasoning are incompatible
because there need be no attainment if the Self is the substratum
of all selves and so obvious too. Naturally he could not pursue the
theme further and laid the first four lines composed by him before
Sri Bhagavan for completion.
Sri Bhagavan admitted the truth of the disciple’s statement and
pointed out why the Self, though obvious, is yet hidden. It is the
wrong identity of the Self with the body, etc.
D.: How did the wrong identity arise?
M.: Due to thoughts. If these thoughts are put an end to, the real Self
should shine forth of itself.
D.: How are these thoughts to be ended?

M.: Find out their basis. All of them are strung on the single ‘I-thought’.
Quell it; all others are quashed. Moreover there is no use knowing
all except the Self. If the Self is known all others become known.
Hence is Self-Realisation the primary and sole duty of man.
D.: How to quell the ‘I-thought’?
M.: If its source is sought it does not arise, and thus it is quelled.
D.: Where and how to find it?
M.: It is in fact the consciousness which enables the individuals to
function in different ways. Pure Consciousness is the Self. All that
is required to realise the Self is to “Be Still.”
D.: What can be easier than that?
M.: So Atma Vidya is the easiest of attainment.
Talk 380.
A European gentleman asked: How do you answer the question,
“Who are you?”
M.: Ask yourself the question, “Who am I?”
D.: Please tell me how you have found it. I shall not be able to find
it myself. (The ‘I’ is the result of biological forces. It results in
silence. I want to know how the Master finds it.)
M.: Is it found only by logic? The scientific analysis is due to intellect.
D.: According to J. C. Bose, nature does not make any difference
between a worm and a man.
M.: What is Nature?
D.: It is that which exists.
M.: How do you know the existence?
D.: By my senses.
M.: ‘My’ implies your existence. But you are speaking of another’s
existence. You must exist to speak of “my senses”. There cannot
be ‘my’ without ‘I’.
D.: I am a poor creature. I come to ask you, Great Master that you are,
what this existence is. There is no special significance in the word
existence. He exists, I exist and others exist. What of that?

M.: The existence of anyone posited, shows your own existence.
“Existence is your nature.”
D.: There is nothing strange in anything existing.
M.: How do you know its existence - rather than your own
existence?
D.: What is new in the existence of anything? I take up your book and
read there that the one question one should ask oneself is “Who
am I?” I want to know “Who are you?” I have my own answer. If
another says the same, and so too, millions of others, there is the
probability of the Self. I want a positive answer for the question
and no playing with words.
M.: In this way you are in the region of probabilities at the best.
D.: Yes. There are no certainties. Even God cannot be proved to be
absolute certainty.
M.: Leave God alone for the time being. What of yourself?
D.: I want confirmation of the Self.
M.: You seek the confirmation from others. Each one though addressed
as ‘you’, styles himself ‘I’. The confirmation is only from ‘I’. There is
no ‘you’ at all. All are comprised in ‘I’. The other can be known only
when the Self is posited. The others do not exist without the subject.
D.: Again, this is nothing new. When I was with Sir C. V. Raman he
told me that the theory of smell could be explained from his theory of
light. Smell need no longer be explained in terms of chemistry. Now,
there is something new; it is progress. That is what I mean, when I
say that there is nothing new in all the statements I hear now.
M.: ‘I’ is never new. It is eternally the same.
D.: Do you mean to say that there is no progress?
M.: Progress is perceived by the outgoing mind. Everything is still
when the mind is introverted and the Self is sought.
D.: The Sciences - what becomes of them?
M.: They all end in the Self. The Self is their finality.
(It was 5 p.m. Sri Bhagavan left the hall and the gentleman left for
the station).

Talk 381.
Mr. Bose, the Bengali Engineer, asked the meaning of the last stanza
of Atma Vidya (Knowledge of the Self). Sri Bhagavan explained on
the following lines:
There is the world perceived, the perception is only apparent; it requires
location for existence and light. Such existence and light are simultaneous
with the rise of mind. So the physical existence and illumination are part
of mental existence and illumination. The latter is not absolute, for the
mind rises and sinks. The mind has its substratum in the Self which is
self-evident, i.e. its existence and self-luminosity are obvious. That is
absolute being, continuous in sleep, waking and dream states also.
The world consists of variety, which is the function of the mind.
The mind shines by reflected light - i.e. light reflected from the self.
Just as the pictures in a cinema show are seen only in diffused, i.e.
artificial light, but not in a strong glare or in thick darkness, so also
the world pictures are perceptible only in diffused, i.e. reflected light
of the Self through the darkness of avidya (ignorance). The world
cannot be seen either in pure ignorance as in sleep, or in pure light
as in Self-Realisation. Avidya is the Cause of variety.
The Engineer said that he understood it only intellectually.
M.: Because intellect holds you at present, i.e. you are in the grip of
intellect in the waking state when you discuss these matters.
Later it was added that Grace is needed for Realisation.
The Engineer asked how Grace has to be got.
M.: Grace is the Self. It is not manifest because of ignorance
prevailing. With sraddha, it will become manifest.
Sraddha, Grace, Light, Spirit are all synonymous with the Self.

Talk 382.
5th April, 1937
A Telugu gentleman, quiet in look, but learned in philosophy, asked
Sri Bhagavan about manolaya.
Sri Bhagavan said that everything is contained in Upadesa Saram, a
copy of which the man was holding in his hand.

D.: What is mind?
M.: See what it is.
D.: It is sankalpa vikalpatmaka (made up of thoughts and their
changes).
M.: Whose sankalpa (thought)?
D.: Sankalpa is the nature of the mind.
M.: Of what is the sankalpa?
D.: Of the externalities.
M.: Quite so. Is that your nature?
D.: It is of the mind.
M.: What is your nature?
D.: Suddha Chaitanya (Pure Conscious Light).
M.: Then why do you worry about sankalpa and the rest.
D.: The mind is admitted to be changing and unsteady (chanchala
and asthira).
M.: It is also said in the same place that the mind is to be introverted and
made to merge into the Self; that the practice must be long because it
is slow; and must be continued until it is totally merged in the Self.
D.: I want prasad, i.e., Grace, for it.
M.: It is always with you. All that is required of you is not to confound
yourself with the extrovert mind but to abide as the Self. That is
prasad.
The gentleman saluted and retired.
Talk 383.
Swami Lokesananda, a sanyasi, asked Sri Bhagavan: Is there
prarabdha for a jivanmukta?
M.: Who is the questioner? From whom does the question proceed?
Is it a jivanmukta who is asking?
D.: No, I am not a mukta as yet.
M.: Then why not let the jivanmukta ask the question for himself?
D.: The doubt is for me.
M.: Quite so. The ajnani has doubt but not a Jnani.

D.: According to the creed that there is no creation (ajatavada), the
explanations of Sri Bhagavan are faultless; but are they admissible
in other schools?
M.: There are three methods of approach in Advaita vada.
(1) The ajatavada is represented by no loss, no creation, no one
bound, no sadhaka, no one desirous of liberation, no liberation.
This is the Supreme Truth. (Mandukya Karika, II - 32).
According to this, there is only One and it admits of no discussion.
(2) Drishti Srishtivada is illustrated thus:- Simultaneous creation. There
are two friends sleeping side by side. One of them dreams that he goes
to Benares with his friend and returns. He tells his friend that both of
them have been in Benares. The other denies it. That statement is true
from the standpoint of one and the denial from that of the other.
(3) Srishti Drishtivada is plain (Gradual creation and knowledge
of it).
Karma is posited as past karma, etc., prarabdha, agami and
sanchita. There must be kartritva (doership) and karta (doer) for
it. Karma (action) cannot be for the body because it is insentient.
It is only so long as dehatma buddhi (‘I-am-the-body idea’) lasts.
After transcending dehatma buddhi one becomes a Jnani. In the
absence of that idea (buddhi) there cannot be either kartritva or
karta. So a Jnani has no karma. That is his experience. Otherwise
he is not a Jnani. However an ajnani identifies the Jnani with his
body, which the Jnani does not do. So the ajnani finds the Jnani
acting, because his body is active, and therefore he asks if the Jnani
is not affected by prarabdha.
The scriptures say that jnana is the fire which burns away all karma
(sarvakarmani). Sarva (all) is interpreted in two ways: (1) to include
prarabdha and (2) to exclude it. In the first way: if a man with three
wives dies, it is asked. “can two of them be called widows and the third
not?” All are widows. So it is with prarabdha, agami and sanchita.
When there is no karta none of them can hold out any longer.
The second explanation is, however, given only to satisfy the
enquirer. It is said that all karma is burnt away leaving prarabdha
alone. The body is said to continue in the functions for which it

has taken its birth. That is prarabdha. But from the jnani’s point
of view there is only the Self which manifests in such variety.
There is no body or karma apart from the Self, so that the actions
do not affect him.
D.: Is there no dehatma buddhi (I-am-the-body idea) for the Jnani?
If, for instance, Sri Bhagavan be bitten by an insect, is there no
sensation?
M.: There is the sensation and there is also the dehatma buddhi. The
latter is common to both Jnani and ajnani with this difference, that
the ajnani thinks dehaiva Atma (only the body is myself), whereas
the Jnani knows all is of the Self (Atmamayam sarvam), or (sarvam
khalvidam Brahma) all this is Brahma. If there be pain let it be. It
is also part of the Self. The Self is poorna (perfect).
Now with regard to the actions of the Jnani, they are only so-called
because they are ineffective. Generally the actions get embedded
as samskaras in the individual. That can be only so long as the
mind is fertile, as in the case of the ajnani. With a Jnani the mind
is surmised; he has already transcended the mind. Because of his
apparent activity the mind has to be inferred in his case, and that
mind is not fertile like that of an ajnani. Hence it is said that a
jnani’s mind is Brahman. Brahman is certainly no other than the
jnani’s mind. The vasanas cannot bear fruit in that soil. His mind
is barren, free from vasanas, etc.
However, since prarabdha was conceded in his case, vasanas also
must be supposed to exist. If they exist they are only for enjoyment
(bhogahetu). That is to say, actions bear twofold fruits, the one for
enjoyment of their fruits and the other leaving an impress on the
mind in the form of samskaras for subsequent manifestation in
future births. The jnani’s mind being barren cannot entertain seeds
of karma. His vasanas simply exhaust themselves by activities
ending in enjoyment only (bhogahetuka karma). In fact, his karma
is seen only from the ajnani’s standpoint. He remains actionless
only. He is not aware of the body as being apart from the Self. How
can there be liberation (mukti) or bondage (bandha) for him? He is
beyond both. He is not bound by karma, either now or ever. There
is no jivanmukta or videhamukta according to him.

D.: From all this it looks as if a Jnani who has scorched all the
vasanas is the best and that he would remain inactive like a stock
or stone.
M.: No, not necessarily. Vasanas do not affect him. Is it not itself a
vasana that one remains like a stock or stone? Sahaja is the state.
Talk 384.
The conversation turned on vasanas. Sri Bhagavan said that good
tendencies and bad ones (suvasana and kuvasana) are concomitant
- the one cannot exist without the other. Maybe that the one class
predominates. Good tendencies (suvasana) are cultivated and they
must also be finally destroyed by jnana.
A young prodigy was mentioned. Sri Bhagavan remarked that latent impressions
of previous births (purva janma samskara) were strong in him.
D.: How does it manifest as the ability to cite well-known saints? Is
it vasana in the form of a seed only?
M.: Yes. Predisposition (samskara) is acquired knowledge and kept
in stock. It manifests under favourable circumstances. One with
strong samskara understands the thing when presented to him much
quicker than another with no samskara or weak samskara.
D.: Does it hold good with inventors also?
M.: “There is nothing new under the sun.” What we call inventions or
discoveries are merely rediscoveries by competent men with strong
samskara in the directions under consideration.
D.: Is it so with Newton, Einstein, etc.?
M.: Yes. Certainly. But the samskaras, however strong, will not
manifest unless in a calm and still mind. It is within the experience
of everyone that his attempts to rake up his memory fail, whereas
something flashes in the mind when he is calm and quiet. Mental
quiet is necessary even for remembrance of forgotten things.
The so-called genius is one who worked hard in his past births
and acquired knowledge and kept it in store as samskaras. He
now concentrates his mind until it merges in the subject. In that
stillness the submerged ideas flash out. That requires favourable
conditions also.

Talk 385.
6th April, 1937
Mr. Vankata Rao, an Andhra gentleman, in the course of conversation
with Sri Bhagavan, was told:
“Until you gain jnana you cannot understand the state of a Jnani.
There is no use asking about the work of Isvara and the rest. Some
ask why Siva went naked in Daruka forest and spoiled the chastity
of the rishi’s wives.
The puranas which record this incident have also said that Siva
had previously saved the Devas and the universe by consuming the
poison halahala at the time of churning the ocean of milk. He, who
could save the world from the deadly poison and lead the sages to
emancipation, had also wandered nude amongst their women. Their
actions are incomprehensible to ordinary intellects. One must be a
Jnani to understand a Jnani or Isvara.”
D.: Should we not learn the jnani’s ways and imitate them?
M.: It is no use. Vasanas are of four kinds:
(1) Pure (Suddha), (2) Impure (malina), (3) Mixed (madhya) and (4)
Good (Sat), according as the jnanis are the Supreme (varishta), the
best (variya), better (vara), and good (vit). Their fruits are reaped
in three ways: (1) of our own will (swechha), and by others’ will
(parechha) and involuntarily (anichha). There have been jnanis
like Gautama, Vyasa, Suka and Janaka.
D.: Was Vyasa also a Jnani?
M.: Yes. Certainly.
D.: Why then did the bathing angels don clothes when he appeared
before them, but not when Suka passed?
M.: That same Vyasa sent Suka to Janaka for instruction; Suka was
tested by Janaka and finally he returned convinced of Vyasa’s
greatness.
D.: Is jnana the same as arudha?
M.: So it is.
D.: What is the relation between bhakti and jnana?

M.: Eternal, unbroken, natural state is jnana. Does it not imply love
of Self? Is it not bhakti?
D.: Idol worship does not seem good. They worship the formless
God in Islam.
M.: What is their conception of God?
D.: As Immanence, etc.
M.: Is not God even then endowed with attributes? Form is only one
kind of attribute. One cannot worship God without some notions.
Any bhavana premises a God with attributes (saguna). Moreover,
where is the use of discussing the form or formlessness of God?
Find out if you have a form. You can then understand God.
D.: I admit I have no form.
M.: All right. You have no form in sleep, but in the waking state you
identify yourself with a form. See which is your real state. That is
understood to be without form on investigation. If you know your
Self to be formless by your jnana, should you not concede the same
amount of jnana to God and understand Him to be formless?
D.: But there is the world for God.
M.: How does the world appear? How are we? Knowing this, you
know God. You will know if He is Siva, or Vishnu or any other or
all put together.
D.: Is Vaikuntha in Paramapada, i.e., in the transcendent Self?
M.: Where is Paramapada or Vaikuntha unless in you?
D.: Vaikuntha, etc., appear involuntarily.
M.: Does this world appear voluntarily?
The questioner returned no answer.
M.: The self-evident ‘I’, ignoring the Self, goes about seeking to know
the non-Self. How absurd!
D.: This is Samkhya Yoga. Being the culmination of all kinds of
other yogas, how can it be understood to start with? Is not bhakti
antecedent to it?
M.: Has not Sri Krishna started the Gita with Sankhya?
D.: Yes. I understand it now.

Talk 386.
D.: In Sri Ramakrishna’s Life it is said that an idol, Ramlal was
animate. Is it true?
M.: Can you account for the animation of this body? Is the movement
of the idol more mysterious than the movement of this body?
D.: Metal does not move itself.
M.: Is not the body a corpse? You will probably consider it a mystery
if the corpse moves. Is that so?
Talk 387.
Three persons came on a short visit; the eldest of them asked: There
is one process of creation mentioned in the Upanishads and another
in Puranas. Which of them is true?
M.: They are many, and meant to indicate that the creation has a cause
and a creator should be posited so that one might seek the cause. The
emphasis is on the purpose of the theory and not on the process of
creation. Moreover, the creation is perceived by someone. There are
no objects without the subject, i.e., the objects do not come and tell
you that they are, but it is you who says that there are the objects.
The objects are therefore what the seer makes of them. They have no
existence independent of the subject. Find out what you are and then
you understand what the world is. That is the object of the theory.
D.: The soul is only a small particle whereas the creation is so huge.
How can we surmise it?
M.: The particle speaks of the huge creation; where is the contradiction?
Talk 388.
Later Sri Bhagavan continued:
There are so many theories, scriptural and scientific. Have they
reached any finality? They cannot. Brahman is said to be subtler than
the subtlest, wider than the widest. Anu is an atom, infinitesimal. It
ends in subtle perception. The subtlety is of the sukshma body, i.e.,
the mind. Beyond the mind there is the Self. The greatest of things are
also conceptions, the conceptions are of the mind; beyond the mind
there is the Self. So the Self is subtler than the subtlest.

There may be any number of theories of creation. All of them extend
outwardly. There will be no limit to them because time and space are
unlimited. They are however only in the mind. See the mind; time
and space are transcended and the Self is realised.
Creation is explained scientifically or logically to one’s own
satisfaction. But is there any finality about it? Such explanations are
called krama srishti (gradual creation).
On the other hand, drishti srishti (simultaneous or sudden creation)
is yugapad srishti. Without the seer there are no objects seen. Find
the seer and the creation is comprised in him. Why look outward and
go on explaining the phenomena which are endless?
Talk 389.
With regard to presents to Sri Bhagavan, He observed: Why do they
bring presents? Do I want them? Even if I refuse they thrust presents
on me. What for? If I accept them I must yield to their wishes. It is
like giving a bait to catch the fish. Is the angler anxious to feed the
fish? No, he is anxious to feed on the fish.
Swami Lokesananda, a sannyasi: What is meant by jnana and vijnana?
M.: These words may mean differently according to the context.
Jnana = samanya jnana or Pure consciousness. Vijnana = Visesha
jnana. Visesha may be (1) worldly (relative knowledge); and (2)
transcendental (Self-Realisation).
Mind is necessary for visesha; it modifies the purity of absolute
consciousness. So vijnana represents intellect and the sheath
composing it, i.e., relative knowledge. In that case jnana is common
(samanya) running through vijnana samjnana, prajnana, ajnana,
mati, dhirti - different modes of knowledge (vide: Aitareyopanishad,
Chapter 3) or jnana is paroksha (hearsay) and vijnana is aparokska
(direct perception) as in jnana vijnana triptatma, one perfectly
content with jnana and vijnana.
D.: What is the relation between Brahman and Isvara?
M.: Brahman is called Isvara in relation to the world.
D.: Is it possible to speak to Isvara as Sri Ramakrishna did?

M.: When we can speak to each other why should we not speak to
Isvara in the same way?
D.: Then why does it not happen with us?
M.: It requires purity and strength of mind and practice in meditation.
D.: Does God become evident if the above conditions exist?
M.: Such manifestations are as real as your own reality. In other words,
when you identify yourself with the body as in jagrat you see gross
objects; when in subtle body or in mental plane as in svapna, you
see objects equally subtle; in the absence of identification as in
sushupti you see nothing. The objects seen bear a relation to the
state of the seer. The same applies to visions of God.
By long practice the figure of God, as meditated upon, appears in
dream and may later appear in jagrat also.
D.: Is that the state of God-realisation?
M.: Listen to what happened once, years ago.
There was a saint by name Namdev. He could see, talk and play
with Vithoba as we do with one another. He used to spend most of
his time in the temple playing with Vithoba.
On one occasion the saints had assembled together, among whom was
one Jnandev of well-established fame and eminence. Jnandev asked
Gora Kumbhar (a potter-saint) to use his proficiency in testing the
soundness of baked pots and find out which of the assembled saints
was properly baked clay. So Gora Kumbhar took his stick and gently
struck each one’s head in joke as if to test. When he came to Namdev
the latter protested in a huff; all laughed and hooted. Namdev was
enraged and he sought Vithoba in the temple. Vithoba said that the
saints knew best; this unexpected reply upset Namdev all the more.
He said: You are God. I converse and play with you. Can there be
anything more to be gained by man?
Vithoba persisted: The saints know.
Namdev: Tell me if there is anything more real than you.
Vithoba: We have been so familiar with each other that my advice
will not have the desired effect on you. Seek the beggar-saint in
the forest and know the truth.

Accordingly Namdev sought out the particular saint mentioned
by Vithoba. Namdev was not impressed with the holiness of the
man for he was nude, dirty and was lying on the floor with his feet
resting on a linga.
Namdev wondered how this could be a saint. The saint, on the
other hand, smiled on Namdev and asked, “Did Vithoba send you
here?” This was a great surprise to Namdev who was now more
inclined to believe the man to be great.
So Namdev asked him: “You are said to be a saint, why do you
desecrate the linga?” The saint replied. “Indeed I am too old and
weak to do the right thing. Please lift my feet and place them where
there is no linga.” Namdev accordingly lifted the saint’s feet and
placed them elsewhere. But there was again a linga below them.
Wherever the feet were placed then and there appeared a linga
underneath. Namdev finally placed the feet on himself and he turned
into a linga. Then Namdev understood that God was immanent and
learnt the truth and departed. He went home and did not go to the
temple for several days. Vithoba now sought him out in his home
and asked why Namdev would not go to the temple to see God.
Namdev said: “Is there a place where He is not?”
The moral of the story is clear. Visions of God have their place
below the plane of Self-Realisation.
Talk 390.
D.: When I read Sri Bhagavan’s works I find that investigation is said
to be the one method for Realisation.
M.: Yes, that is vichara.
D.: How is that to be done?
M.: The questioner must admit the existence of his self. “I AM” is the
Realisation. To pursue the clue till Realisation is vichara. Vichara
and Realisation are the same.
D.: It is elusive. What shall I meditate upon?
M.: Meditation requires an object to meditate upon, whereas there is
only the subject without the object in vichara. Meditation differs
from vichara in this way.

D.: Is not dhyana one of the efficient processes for Realisation?
M.: Dhyana is concentration on an object. It fulfils the purpose of keeping
away diverse thoughts and fixing the mind on a single thought, which
must also disappear before Realisation. But Realisation is nothing new to
be acquired. It is already there, but obstructed by a screen of thoughts.
All our attempts are directed for lifting this screen and then
Realisation is revealed.
If a true seeker is advised to meditate, many may go away satisfied
with the advice. But someone among them may turn round and ask,
“Who am I to meditate on an object?” Such a one must be told to
find the Self. That is the finality. That is Vichara.
D.: Will vichara alone do in the absence of meditation?
M.: Vichara is the process and the goal also. ‘I AM’ is the goal and the
final Reality. To hold to it with effort is vichara. When spontaneous
and natural it is Realisation.
Talk 391.
The same sannyasi visitor, Swami Lokesananda, asked about samadhi.
M.: (1) Holding on to Reality is samadhi.
(2) Holding on to Reality with effort is savikalpa samadhi.
(3) Merging in Reality and remaining unaware of the world is
nirvikalpa samadhi.1
(4) Merging in Ignorance and remaining unaware of the world is
sleep. (Head bends but not in samadhi).
(5) Remaining in the primal, pure natural state without effort is
sahaja nirvikalpa samadhi.
D.: It is said that one remaining in nirvikalpa samadhi for 21 days
must necessarily give up the physical body.
M.: Samadhi means passing beyond dehatma buddhi (I-am-the-body
idea) and non-identification of the body with the Self is a foregone
conclusion.
There are said to be persons who have been immersed in nirvikalpa
samadhi for a thousand years or more.
1. See table on next page

This state is compared This state is compared
to the waveless ocean to a flame unagitated by
whose waters are still and currents of air, but burning
quite steady

There are all manner of
thoughts which rise up
from the Reality within
and manifest themselves.
Hold on to that Reality.

(Sabdanuvidha)
There are the external
phenomena which are said
to have their origin from
the Single Reality. Search
for It and hold on to it.

All these four kinds of savikalpa samadhi are
attended with effort

Merging in the one
Reality underlying all the
phenomena and remaining
unaware of the transitory

The mind is afflicted by
Kama, Krodha, etc. See
wherefrom they arise and
how they have their being.
Hold on to their source.

(Drisyanuvidha)
The mind jumps from one
object to another. Keep
it steady, fixed on the
Reality behind them

When these kinds of nirvikalpa samadhi are not
attended with effort and it is realised that the waveless
ocean of external samadhi and the steady flame of
internal samadhi are identical, the state is said to be

Merging in the Inmost Being
which is the One Reality
giving rise to all thoughts,
etc., and remaining unaware
of anything else.

(Bahya)
External

(Antar)
Internal

(Antar)
Internal

NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI

(Bahya)
External

SAVIKALPA SAMADHI

They can be further subdivided thus:

Talk 392.
(Swami Lokesananda continued another series of questions).
D.: They say that Kundalini must be roused before Realisation and
that its awakening makes the body feel hot. Is that so?
M.: The yogis call it Kundalini Sakti. It is the same as vritti 1 of the form
of God (Bhagavatakara vritti) of the bhaktas and vritti of the form
of Brahman (Brahmakara vritti) of the jnanis. It must be preliminary
to Realisation. The sensation produced may be said to be hot.
D.: Kundalini is said to be of the shape of a serpent but vrittis cannot
be so.
M.: The Kundalini of jnana marga is said to be the Heart, which is
also described in various ways as a network of nadis, of the shape
of a serpent, of a lotus bud, etc.
D.: Is this Heart the same as the physiological heart?
M.: No, Sri Ramana Gita defines it as the origin of the ‘I-thought’.
D.: But I read that it is on the right of the chest.
M.: It is all meant to help the bhavana (imagery). There are books
dealing with six centres (shadchakra) and many other lakshyas
(centres), internal and external. The description of the Heart is
one among so many lakshyas. But it is not necessary. It is only the
source of the ‘I-thought’. That is the ultimate truth.
D.: May we take it to be the source of the antahkaranas?
M.: The inner organs (antakaranas) are classified as five: (1)
Knowledge - Jnana; (2) Mind - Manas; (3) Intellect - Buddhi; (4)
Memory - Chitta; and (5) The ego - Ahankara; some say only the
latter four; others say only two, namely (1) Manas, mind and (2)
Ahankara, the ego; still others say the Antahkarana is only one
whose different functions make it appear differently and hence its
different names. Heart is thus the source of the Antahkaranas.
There is the body which is insentient; there is the Self which is eternal
and self-luminous; in between the two there has arisen a phenomenon,
namely the ego, which goes under these different names, mind
(manas), intellect (buddhi), memory (chitta), the ego (ahankara),
1. vritti = mode of mind

power (sakti), life current (prana), etc. Seek your source; the search
takes you to the Heart automatically. The antahkaranas are only
ideas (kalpana) to explain the subtle body (sukshma sarira). The
physical body (sarira) is made up of the elements: earth, air, fire,
water and ether; it is insentient. The Self is pure and self-luminous
and thus self-evident. The relation between the two is sought to
be established by positing a subtle body, composed of the subtle
aspects of the five elements on the one hand, and the reflected
light of the Self on the other. In this way the subtle body which
is synonymous with the mind, is both sentient and insentient, i.e.,
abhasa. Again, by the play of the pure quality (satva guna) on the
elements, their brightness (satva aspect) manifests as the mind
(manas), and the senses (jnanendriyas); by the play of rajas (active
quality), the raja (active) aspect manifests as life (prana) and limbs
(karmendriyas); by the play of dullness (tamas) the tama (dark)
aspect manifests as the gross phenomena of the body, etc.
D.: But the mind is reputed to have these three qualities also.
M.: Yes. There is purity (satva) in satva (in the pure quality); activity
in it (rajas in satva); and dullness also (tamas in satva); and so on,
Suddha satva is quite pure; misra (mixed satva) is a combination
of satva with other qualities. The quality satva implies only its
predominance over the other two qualities.
Later Sri Bhagavan continued: The intricate maze of philosophy
of different schools is said to clarify matters and reveal the Truth.
But in fact they create confusion where no confusion need exist.
To understand anything there must be the Self. The Self is obvious.
Why not remain as the Self? What need to explain the non-self?
Take the Vedanta for instance: They say there are fifteen kinds of prana.
The student is made to commit the names to memory and also their
functions. The air goes up and is called prana; goes down and is called
apana; operates the indriyas and is called something. Why all this?
Why do you classify, give names and enumerate the functions, and so
on? Is it not enough to know that one prana does the whole work?
The antahkarana thinks, desires, wills, reasons, etc., and each
function is attributed to one name such as mind, intellect, etc. Has
anyone seen the pranas or the antahkaranas? Have they any real

existence? They are mere conceptions. When and where will such
conceptions end?
Consider the following: A man sleeps. He says on waking that he
slept. The question is asked: ‘Why does he not say in his sleep
that he is sleeping?’ The answer is given that he is sunk in the Self
and cannot speak, like a man who has dived in water to bring out
something from the bottom. The diver cannot speak under water;
when he has actually recovered the articles he comes out and
speaks. Well, what is the explanation?
Being in water, water will flow into his mouth if he were to open
the mouth for speaking. Is it not simple? But the philosopher is not
content with this simple fact. He explains, saying that fire is the
deity presiding over speech; that it is inimical to water and therefore
cannot function! This is called philosophy and the learners are
struggling to learn all this! Is it not a sheer waste of time? Again the
Gods are said to preside over the limbs and senses of the individual
(vyashti). They are the limbs and senses of Virat (samashti). So
they go on explaining Hiranyagarbha, etc. Why should confusion
be created and then explained away? Ah! Fortunate is the man who
does not involve himself in this maze!
I was indeed fortunate that I never took to it. Had I taken to it,
I would probably be nowhere - always in confusion. My purva
vasanas (former tendencies) directly took me to the enquiry “Who
am I?” It was indeed fortunate!

Talk 393.
11th April, 1937
D.: There is a short account of the spiritual experiences of St. Theresa,
in the March number of the Prabuddha Bharata. She was devoted
to a figure of the Madonna which became animated to her sight,
and she was in bliss. Is it the same as Saktipata?
M.: The animated figure indicates depth of meditation (dhyana bala).
Saktipata prepares the mind for introversion. There is a process of
concentration of mind on one’s own shadow which in due course
becomes animated and answers questions put to it. That is due to
strength of mind or depth of meditation. Whatever is external is also

transitory. Such phenomena may produce joy for the time being.
But abiding peace, i.e., santi, does not result. This is got only by
the removal of avidya (ignorance).
Talk 394.
D.: How is the mind to be stilled?
M.: Looking at the mind with the mind, or fixing the mind in the Self,
brings the mind under control of the Self.
D.: Is there any yoga, i.e., a process for it?
M.: Vichara (investigation) alone will do.
Talk 395.
D.: How is Poorna Brahman to be attained? What is the method best
suited to a grihasta?
M.: You have already said poorna, i.e., perfection. Are you apart from
Poorna? If apart from it, will it be poorna? If not apart how does
the question arise? The knowledge that Brahman is poorna and that
you are not apart from the same is the finality. See it and you will
find that you are not a grihasta or any limited being.
D.: What are the tatvas?
M.: Knowledge of poorna Brahman will elucidate the other matters
automatically.

Talk 396.
12th April, 1937
A Dutch lady, Mrs. Gongrijp, an ardent theosophist, who had worked
long in Java and is now living in Adyar, came here for a short visit.
She asked: Theosophy speaks of tanha, meaning thirst for rebirth.
What is its cause?
M.: Thirst for rebirth is the desire to be reborn so as to end successive
births. The spirit is at present moribund; it must be revived so that
rebirth may take place after the present apparent death. Forgetfulness
of your real nature is the present death; remembrance of it is the
rebirth. It puts an end to successive births. Yours is eternal life.
D.: I take tanha to mean ‘clinging to life’ - the desire for eternal life.

M.: No doubt it is so. How does the desire arise? Because the present
state is unbearable. Why? Because it is not your true nature. Had it
been your real nature no desire would disturb you. How does the
present state differ from your real nature? You are spirit in truth.
However that spirit is wrongly identifying itself with the gross
body. The body has been projected by the mind; the mind itself
has originated from the spirit. If the wrong identification ceases,
there will be peace and permanent untellable bliss.
D.: Life is of the body and rebirth is to incarnate in another body.
M.: Mere change of body produces no effect. The ego associated
with this body is transferred to another body. How can that
satisfy anyone?
Moreover, what is life? Life is existence which is your Self. That is
life Eternal. Otherwise can you imagine a time when you are not?
That life is now conditioned by the body and you wrongly identify
your being with that of the body. You are life unconditioned. These
bodies attach themselves to you as mental projections and you are
now afflicted by ‘I-am-the-body’ idea. If this idea ceases you are
your Self.
Where or how were you before being born? Were you in sleep?
How were you? You exist then too without the body. Then the
ego arises, and then the mind which projects the body.
‘I-am-the-body’ idea is the result. Because the body exists you say that
it was born and that it will die, and transfer the idea to the Self
saying that you are born and that you will die. In fact you remain
without the body in sleep; but now you remain with the body.
The Self can remain without the body, but the body cannot exist
apart from the Self.
‘I-am-the-body’ thought is ignorance; that the body is not apart from
the Self is knowledge. That is the difference between knowledge
and ignorance.
The body is a mental projection, the mind is the ego; and the ego
rises from the Self. So the body-thought is distracting and strays
away from the Self. For whom is the body or the birth? It is not
for the Self, the Spirit. It is for the non-self which imagines itself

separate. So long as there is the sense of separation there will be
afflicting thoughts. If the original source is regained and the sense
of separation is put an end to, there is peace.
Consider what happens when a stone is thrown up. It leaves its
source and is projected up, tries to come down and is always in
motion until it regains its source, where it is at rest. So also the
waters of the ocean evaporate, form clouds which are moved
by winds, condense into water, fall as rain and the waters roll
down the hill in streams and rivers, until they reach their original
source, the ocean, reaching which they are at peace. Thus, you
see, wherever there is a sense of separateness from the source
there is agitation and movement until the sense of separateness
is lost. So it is with yourself. Now that you identify yourself with
the body you think that you are separate from the Spirit - the true
Self. You must regain your source before the false identity ceases
and you are happy.
Gold is not an ornament, but the ornament is nothing but gold.
Whatever shape the ornament may assume and however different
the ornaments are, there is only one reality, namely gold. So also
with the bodies and the Self. The single reality is the Self. To identify
oneself with the body and yet to seek happiness is like attempting to
cross a river on the back of an alligator. The body identity is due to
extroversion and the wandering of the mind. To continue in that state
will only keep one in an endless tangle and there will be no peace.
Seek your source, merge in the Self and remain all alone.
Rebirth means discontent with the present state, and desire to
be born where there will be no discontent. Births, being of the
body, cannot affect the Self. The Self remains over even after
the body perishes. The discontent is due to the wrong identity
of the Eternal Self with the perishable body. The body is a
necessary adjunct of the ego. If the ego is killed the eternal Self
is revealed in all its glory.
The body is the Cross. Jesus, the son of man, is the ego or ‘I
am-the-body’ idea. When he is crucified, he is resurrected as
the Glorious Self - Jesus, the Son of God! — “Give up this life
if thou wouldst live”

Talk 397.
D.: Fear is consequent on the possibility of non-existence. It pertains
to the body. One is not aware of the body in sleep. One is not
afraid of, but courts sleep, whereas one dreads death. Why is this
difference between the two outlooks?
M.: Desire of sleep or fear of death are when the mind is active and
not in the respective states themselves. The mind knows that the
body entity persists and reappears after sleep. Therefore sleep is
not attended with fear but the pleasure of non-bodily existence is
sought. Whereas the mind is not sure of reappearance after the
so-called death and dreads it.

Talk 398.
14th April, 1937
Dandapani, a resident devotee now on a North Indian tour, sent an
extract from the Modern Psychological Review which stated that the
dynamic centre of the Heart is on the right and not on the left whereas
the physical organ is on the left.
Conversation followed on that subject.
M.: The yoga marga speaks of the six centres each of which must be
reached by practice and transcended until one reaches sahasrara
where nectar is found and thus immortality. The yogis say that one
enters into the paranadi which starts from the sacral plexus whereas
the jnanis say that the same nadi starts from the heart. Reconciliation
between the seeming]y contradictory statements is effected in the
secret doctrine which distinctly states the yogic paranadi is from
muladhara and the jnana paranadi is from the Heart. The truth is
that the paranadi should be entered. By yogic practice one goes
down, then rises up, wanders all through until the goal is reached;
by jnana abhyas one settles down directly in the centre.
D.: Is not para followed by pasyanti, etc.?
M.: You are speaking of vak which is divided into (1) para, (2) pasyanti,
(3) madhyama and (4) vaikhari; Vak is prana sakti whereas the
mind is tejorupa or chit sakti. The sakti is the manifestation of the
unmanifest origin.

The Yogis attach the highest importance to going up to sahasrara
i.e., the brain centre or the thousand-petalled-lotus. Some yogis say
that there are other centres higher up with greater involutions e.g.,
100,000 (100) petalled or 100,000,000 (108) petalled ones. Let us
omit them for the present. They point out the scriptural statement
that the life-current enters the body through the fontanelle and
argue that, viyoga (separation) having come about that way, yoga
(union) must also be effected in the reverse way. Therefore we must
by yoga practice, gather up the pranas and enter the fontanelle
for the consummation of yoga. The jnanis point out that the yogi
assumes the existence of the body, its separateness from the Self,
and therefore advises effort for reunion by the practice of yoga.
In fact, the body is in the mind which has the brain for its seat,
which again functions by light borrowed from another source
as admitted by the yogis themselves in their fontanelle theory.
The Jnani further argues: if the light is borrowed it must come
from its native source. Go to the source direct and do not depend
on borrowed resources. Just as an iron ball comes into being
separate from the mass of iron, gets fiery, in fire, later cools down
giving up the fire, but must again be made fiery to reunite with the
original mass, so also the cause of separation must also form the
factor of reunion.
Again if there is an image reflected there must be a source and also
accessories like the Sun and a pot of water for reflection. To do away
with the reflection either the surface is covered up corresponding to
reaching the fontanelle according to the yogis or the water is drained
away which is called tapas (Tapo Brahmeti - tapas is Brahman).
That is to say, the thoughts or the brain activities are made to cease.
This is jnana-marga.
All these are however on the assumption that the jiva is separate
from the Self or Brahman. But are we separate? “No”, says the
Jnani. The ego is simply wrong identity of the Self with the
non-self, as in the case of a colourless crystal and its coloured
background. The crystal though colourless appears red because of
its background. If the background is removed the crystal shines in
its original purity. So it is with the Self and the antahkaranas.

Still again the illustration is not quite appropriate. For the ego has
its source from the Self and is not separate like the background
from the crystal. Having its source from the Self, the ego must only
be retraced in order that it might merge in its source.
The centre of the ego and its core is called the Heart, the same as
the Self.
A gentleman asked if the yogis also reach the anahata and thus realise
the Heart-centre as is done by the jnanis but in a different way.
M.: Anahata is not the same as the Heart-centre. If so, why should
they wander further on to Sahasrara? Moreover, the question arises
because of the sense of separateness persisting in us. We are never
away from the Heart-centre. Before reaching anahata or after
passing it, one is only in the centre. Whether one understands it or
not, one is not away from the centre. Practice of yoga or vichara
is done, always remaining in the centre only.
D.: What is to be our sadhana?
M.: Sadhana for the sadhaka is the sahaja of the siddha. Sahaja is
the original state, so that sadhana amounts to the removal of the
obstacles to the realisation of this abiding truth.
D.: Is concentration of mind one of the sadhanas?
M.: Concentration is not thinking one thing. It is, on the other hand,
putting off all other thoughts which obstruct the vision of our
true nature. All our efforts are only directed to lifting the veil of
ignorance. Now it appears difficult to quell the thoughts. In the
regenerate state it will be found more difficult to call in thoughts.
For are there things to think of? There is only the Self. Thoughts
can function only if there are objects. But there are no objects. How
can thoughts arise at all?
The habit makes us believe that it is difficult to cease thinking. If
the error is found out, one would not be fool enough to exert oneself
unnecessarily by way of thinking.
D.: Is not grace more effective than abhyasa?
M.: Guru simply helps you in the eradication of ignorance. Does he
hand over Realisation to you?
D.: We are ignorant.

M.: Inasmuch as you say you are ignorant, you are wise. Is he a
madman who says that he is mad? Guru’s Grace is like a hand
extended to help you out of water, or it makes your way easier for
the removal of ignorance.
D.: Is it not like a medicine to cure the disease of avidya?
M.: What is medicine for? It is only to restore the patient to the original
state of health. What is this talk of Guru. Grace, God, etc.? Does
the Guru hold you by the hand and whisper something in your
ear? You imagine him to be like yourself. Because you are with
a body you think that he is also a body in order to do something
tangible to you. His work lies within. How is Guru gained? God,
who is immanent, in his Grace takes pity on the loving devotee and
manifests Himself as a being according to the devotee’s standard.
The devotee thinks that he is a man and expects relationship as
between bodies. But the Guru, who is God or Self incarnate, works
from within, helps the man to see the error of his ways, guides him
in the right path until he realises the Self within.
After such realisation the disciple feels, “I was so worried before. I
am after all the Self, the same as before but not affected by anything;
where is he who was miserable? He is nowhere to be seen.”
What should we do now? Only act up to the words of the master,
work within. The Guru is both within and without. So he creates
conditions to drive you inward and prepares the interior to drag
you to the centre. Thus he gives a push from without and exerts a
pull from within so that you may be fixed at the centre.
In sleep you are centred within. Simultaneously with waking
your mind rushes out, thinking this, that and all else. This must be
checked. It is possible only for the agent who can work both within
and without. Can he be identified with a body? We think that the
world can be conquered by our efforts. When frustrated externally
and driven internally, we feel “Oh! oh! There is a power higher
than man.” The existence of the higher power must be admitted
and recognised. The ego is a very powerful elephant and cannot
be brought under control by anyone less than a lion, who is no
other than the Guru in this instance; whose very look makes the
elephant tremble and die. We will know in due course that our

glory lies where we cease to exist. In order to gain that state, one
should surrender oneself saying “LORD! Thou art my Refuge!” The
master then sees “This man is in a fit state to receive guidance,” and
so guides him.
D.: What is Self-surrender?
M.: It is the same as self-control; control is effected by removal of
samskaras which imply the functioning of the ego. The ego submits
only when it recognises the Higher Power. Such recognition is
surrender or submission, or self-control. Otherwise the ego remains
stuck up like the image carved on a tower, making a pretence by
its strained look and posture that it is supporting the tower on its
shoulders. The ego cannot exist without the Power but thinks that
it acts of its own accord.
D.: How can the rebellious mind be brought under control?
M.: Either seek its source so that it may disappear or surrender that
it may be struck down.
D.: But the mind slips away from our control.
M.: Be it so. Do not think of it. When you recollect yourself bring it
back and turn it inward. That is enough.
No one succeeds without effort. Mind control is not one’s birthright.
The successful few owe their success to their perseverance.
A passenger in a train keeps his load on the head by his own folly.
Let him put it down: he will find the load reaches the destination
all the same. Similarly, let us not pose as the doers, but resign
ourselves to the guiding Power.
D.: Swami Vivekananda says that a spiritual Guru can transfer
spirituality substantially to the disciple.
M.: Is there a substance to be transferred? Transfer means eradication of
the sense of being the disciple. The master does it. Not that the man
was something at one time and metamorphosed later into another.
D.: Is not Grace the gift of the Guru?
M.: God, Grace and Guru are all synonymous and also eternal and
immanent. Is not the Self already within? Is it for the Guru to bestow
It by his look? If a Guru thinks so, he does not deserve the name.

The books say that there are so many kinds of diksha (initiations
- hasta diksha, sparsa diksha, chakshu diksha, mano diksha, etc.)
They also say that the Guru makes some rites with fire, water, japa,
mantras, etc., and call such fantastic performances dikshas, as if
the disciple (sishya) becomes ripe only after such processes are
gone through by the Guru.
If the individual is sought he is nowhere to be found. Such is the
Guru. Such is Dakshinamurti. What did he do? He was silent; the
disciples appeared before him. He maintained silence, the doubts
of the disciples were dispelled, which means that they lost their
individual identities. That is jnana and not all the verbiage usually
associated with it.
Silence is the most potent form of work. However vast and
emphatic the sastras may be, they fail in their effect. The Guru
is quiet and peace prevails in all. His silence is more vast and
more emphatic than all the sastras put together. These questions
arise because of the feeling, that having been here so long, heard
so much, exerted so hard, one has not gained anything. The work
proceeding within is not apparent. In fact the Guru is always
within you.
Thayumanavar says: “Oh Lord! Coming with me all along the
births, never abandoning me and finally rescuing me!” Such is the
experience of Realisation.
Srimad Bhagavad Gita says the same in a different way, “We two
are not only now but have ever been so.”
D.: Does not the Guru take a concrete form?
M.: What is meant by concrete? Because you identify your being with
your body, you raise this question. Find out if you are the body.
The Gita says: param bhavam ajanantah (Bh. Gita IX - II) - that
those who cannot understand the transcendental nature (of Sri
Krishna) are fools, deluded by ignorance.
The master appears to dispel that ignorance. As Thayumanavar puts
it, he appears as a man to dispel the ignorance of a man, just as a deer
is used as a decoy to capture the wild deer. He has to appear with a
body in order to eradicate our ignorant “I-am-the-body” idea.

15th April, l937
Talk 399.
Mr. Bose, the Bengali Engineer, has since read Gaudapada Karikas
and Sir S. Radhakrishnan’s Indian Philosophy and so asked questions
as follows:
D.: Is there any genuine difference between dream experience and
waking state?
M.: Because you find the dream creations transitory in relation to the
waking state there is said to be a difference. The difference is only
apparent and not real.
D.: Is the waking state independent of existing objects?
M.: Were it so, the objects must exist without the seer; that is to say,
the object must tell you that it exists. Does it do so? For example,
does a cow moving in front of you say that she is moving? Or do
you say of your own accord “There is a cow moving”? The objects
exist because of the seer cognising them.
D.: Gaudapada in Mandukya Karikas says that there is no difference
between the two states from the standpoint of Reality-Absolute.
M.: Of course not.
D.: I believe Bhagavan also says so. Prof. Radhakrishnan in his Indian
Philosophy says that in his Brahma Sutra Commentary Sri Sankara
makes a distinction between the two states. Is it a fact? If so, what is
it? How can there be any distinction from the viewpoint of reality?
So long as the mind exists in any form there will be distinction.
But from the standpoint of Atman, non-dual Brahman, can there
be any distinction?
M.: The dream is for the one who says that he is awake. In fact,
wakefulness and dream are equally unreal from the standpoint of
the Absolute.
D.: In pure Advaita can evolution, creation or manifestation have
any place? What about the theory of vivarta according to which
Brahman appears as the world without forgetting its essential
nature, like the rope appearing as snake?

M.: There are different methods of approach to prove the unreality of
the universe. The example of the dream is one among them. Jagrat,
svapna and sushupti are all treated elaborately in the scripture in
order that the Reality underlying them might be revealed. It is not
meant to accentuate differences among the three states. The purpose
must be kept clearly in view.
Now they say that the world is unreal. Of what degree of unreality
is it? Is it like that of a son of a barren mother or a flower in the sky,
mere words without any reference to facts? Whereas the world is a
fact and not a mere word. The answer is that it is a superimposition
on the one Reality, like the appearance of a snake on a coiled rope
seen in dim light.
But here too the wrong identity ceases as soon as the friend
points out that it is a rope. Whereas in the matter of the world it
persists even after it is known to be unreal. How is that? Again the
appearance of water in a mirage persists even after the knowledge of
the mirage is recognised. So it is with the world. Though knowing
it to be unreal, it continues to manifest.
But the water of the mirage is not sought to satisfy one’s thirst. As
soon as one knows that it is a mirage, one gives it up as useless
and does not run after it for procuring water.
D.: Not so with the appearance of the world. Even after it is repeatedly
declared to be false one cannot avoid satisfying one’s wants from
the world. How can the world be false?
M.: It is like a man satisfying his dream wants by dream creations.
There are objects, there are wants and there is satisfaction. The
dream creation is as purposeful as the jagrat world and yet it is
not considered real.
Thus we see that each of these illustrations serves a distinct purpose in
establishing the stages of unreality. The realised sage finally declares
that in the regenerate state the jagrat world also is found to be as
unreal as the dream world is found to be in the jagrat state.
Each illustration should be understood in its proper context; it
should not be studied as an isolated statement. It is a link in a chain.
The purpose of all these is to direct the seeker’s mind towards the
one Reality underlying them all.

D.: Is there that difference in the philosophy of Sankara and Gaudapada
which the learned Professor wants us to believe?
M.: The difference is only in our imagination.
D.: Sir S. Radhakrishnan writes:
“The general idea pervading Gaudapada’s work that bondage and
liberation, the individual soul and the world are all unreal, makes
a caustic critic observe that the theory which has nothing better
to say than that an unreal soul is trying to escape from an unreal
Supreme Good, may itself be an unreality. It is one thing to say that
the unchangeable reality expressing itself in the changing universe
without forfeiting its nature is a mystery, and another to dismiss
the whole changing universe as a mere mirage. If we have to play
the game of life we cannot do so with the conviction that the play
is a show and all the prizes in it are mere blanks. No philosophy
can consistently hold such a theory and be at rest with itself. The
greatest condemnation of such a theory is that we are obliged to
occupy ourselves with objects the existence and value of which
we are continually denying in theory. It only shows that there is
something else which includes and transcends the world but it does
not imply the world is a dream.”
M.: As was already said, the purpose of the whole philosophy is to
indicate the underlying Reality whether of the jagrat, svapna and
sushupti states, or the individual souls, the world and God.
There are three outlooks possible:-
(1) The Vyavaharika: The man sees the world in all its variety,
surmises the creator and believes in himself as the subject. All these
are thus reduced to the three fundamentals, jagat, jiva and Isvara. He
learns the existence of the creator and tries to reach him in order to
gain immortality. If one is thus released from bondage, there are all
other individuals existing as before who should work out their own
salvation. He more or less admits the One Reality underlying all these
phenomena. The phenomena are due to the play of maya. Maya is the
sakti of Isvara or the activity of Reality. Thus, existence of different
souls, objects, etc., do not clash with the advaitic point of view.
(2) The Pratibhasika: The jagat, jiva and Isvara are all cognised
by the seer only. They do not have any existence independent of

him. So there is only one jiva, be it the individual or God. All else
is simply a myth.
(3) The Paramarthika: i.e., ajatavada (no-creation doctrine) which
admits of no second. There is no reality or absence of it, no seeking
or gaining, no bondage or liberation and so on.
The question arises why then do all the sastras speak of the Lord as
the creator? How can the creature that you are create the creator and
argue that the jagat, jiva and Isvara are mental conceptions only?
The answer is as follows:-
You know that your father of this jagrat state is dead and that
several years have elapsed since his death. However you see him
in your dream and recognise him to be your father, of whom you
were born and who has left patrimony to you. Here the creator is
in the creature. Again, you dream that you are serving a king and
that you are a part in the administrative wheel of the kingdom. As
soon as you wake up all of them have disappeared leaving you, the
single individual, behind. Where were they all? Only in yourself.
The same analogy holds good in the other case also.
D.: In the Vyavaharika, above mentioned, how does maya come in?
M.: Maya is only Isvara-Sakti or the activity of Reality.
D.: Why does it become active?
M.: How can this question arise? You are yourself within its fold. Are
you standing apart from that universal activity in order to ask this
question? The same Power is raising this doubt in order that all
doubts may finally cease.
D.: The dream world is not purposeful as the jagrat world, because
we do not feel that wants are satisfied.
M.: You are not right. There are thirst and hunger in dream also. You
might have had your fill and kept over the remaining food for the
next day. Nevertheless you feel hungry in dream. This food does
not help you. Your dream-hunger can be satisfied only by eating
dream-food. Dream-wants are satisfied by dream-creations only.
D.: We recollect our dreams in our jagrat but not vice-versa.
M.: Not right again. In the dream you identify yourself with the one
now speaking.

D.: But we do not know that we are dreaming as apart from waking
as we do now.
M.: The dream is the combination of jagrat and sushupti. It is due
to the samskaras of the jagrat state. Hence we remember dreams
at present. Samskaras are not formed contrariwise; therefore also
we are not aware of the dream and jagrat simultaneously. Still
everyone will recollect strange perplexities in dream. One wonders
if he dreams or is awake. He argues and determines that he is only
awake. When really awake, he finds that it was all only a dream.
Talk 400.
In the course of another conversation Sri Bhagavan said: Photisms
add zest to meditation and nothing more.

Talk 401.
16th April, 1937
Mr. Krishnamurti, an Andhra gentleman, asked as follows:- When
we make tapas, on what object must we fix our sight? Our mind is
fixed on what we utter.
M.: What is tapas for?
D.: For Self-Realisation.
M.: Quite so. Tapas depends on the competency of the person. One
requires a form to contemplate. But it is not enough. For can anyone
keep looking at an image always? So the image must be implemented
by japa. Japa helps fixing the mind on the image, in addition to the
eyesight. The result of these efforts is concentration of mind, which
ends in the goal. He becomes what he thinks. Some are satisfied with the
name of the image. Every form must have a name. That name denotes
all the qualities of God. Constant japa puts off all other thoughts and
fixes the mind. That is tapas. One-pointedness is the tapas wanted.
The question what tapas is was asked in order to know what purpose
to serve. It will take the form required for the purpose.
D.: Are not physical austerities also tapas?
M.: May be one form of it. They are due to vairagya (dispassion) .
D.: I have seen a man with his arm lifted all his life.

M.: That is vairagya.
D.: Why should one afflict his body for the purpose?
M.: You think it is affliction whereas it is a vow and for the other man
it is an achievement and a pleasure.
Dhyana may be external or internal or both. Japa is more important
than external form. It must be done until it becomes natural. It
starts with effort and is continued until it proceeds of itself. When
natural it is called Realisation.
Japa may be done even while engaged in other work. That which
is, the One Reality. It may be represented by a form, a japa,
mantra, vichara or any kind of attempt. All of them finally resolve
themselves into that One Single Reality. Bhakti, vichara, japa are
only different forms of our efforts to keep out the unreality. The
unreality is an obsession at present. Reality is our true nature. We
are wrongly persisting in unreality, that is, thoughts and worldly
activities. Cessation of these will reveal the Truth. Our attempts
are directed towards keeping them out. It is done by thinking of
the Reality only. Although it is our true nature it looks as if we are
thinking of the Reality. What we do really amounts to the removal
of obstacles for the revelation of our true Being. Meditation or
vichara is thus a reversion to our true nature.
D.: Are our attempts sure to succeed?
M.: Realisation is our nature. It is nothing new to be gained. What is
new cannot be eternal. Therefore there is no need for doubting if
one would lose or gain the Self.
Talk 402.
While speaking of the Brain and the Heart Sri Bhagavan recalled an
incident of old days as follows:-
Kavyakantha Ganapati Muni once argued that the brain was the most
important centre and Sri Bhagavan maintained that the Heart was even
more so. There were others watching the discourse. A few days after
Sri Bhagavan received a letter containing a short poem in English on
that discourse from a young boy, N. S. Arunachalam, who had not
yet matriculated.

That poem is remarkable for its poetic imagination. Sri Bhagavan,
Kavyakantha, and the assemblage of other persons are represented
as the Heart, the brain and the body respectively, and again as the
sun, the moon and the earth also. The light from the sun is reflected
on the moon and the earth is illumined. Similarly the brain acts by
consciousness derived from the Heart and the body is thus protected.
This teaching of Sri Bhagavan is found in Ramana Gita also. The
Heart is the most important centre from which vitality and light radiate
to the brain, thus enabling it to function. The vasanas are enclosed
in the Heart in their subtlest form, later flowing to the brain which
reflects them highly magnified corresponding to a cinema-show at
every stage. That is how the world is said to be nothing more than a
cinema-show.
Sri Bhagavan also added:- Were the vasanas in the brain instead of
in the Heart they must be extinguished if the head is cut off so that
reincarnations will be at an end. But it is not so. The Self obviously
safeguards the vasanas in its closest proximity, i.e. within itself in the
Heart, just as a miser keeps his most valued possessions (treasure) with
himself and never out of contact. Hence the place where the vasanas are,
is the Self, i.e., the Heart, and not the brain (which is only the theatre
for the play of the vasanas from the greenhouse of the Heart.)

Talk 403.
17th April, 1937
There was some reference to the extract from the Modern Psychological
Review, wondering if any instruments could be of use in detecting
the Heart-centre and if proper subjects were available for recording
the experience of the adepts in the spiritual path, and so on. Others
were speaking. Sri Bhagavan said: In the incident mentioned in the
book Self-Realization that I became unconscious and symptoms of
death supervened, I was all along aware. I could feel the action of
the physical heart stopped and equally the action of the Heart-centre
unimpaired. This state lasted about a quarter of an hour.
We asked if it was true that some disciples have had the privilege of feeling
Sri Bhagavan’s Heart-centre to be on the right by placing their hands on

Sri Bhagavan’s chest. Sri Bhagavan said, “Yes.” (Mr. Viswanatha Iyer,
Narayana Reddi and others have said they felt Sri Bhagavan’s Heart-centre
to be on the right by placing their hands on his chest).
A devotee rightly observed that if hands could feel and locate the
Heart-centre, delicate scientific instruments should certainly do it.
D.: The Heart is said to be on the right, on the left or in the centre. With
such differences of opinion how are we to meditate on Hridaya?
M.: You are and it is a fact. Dhyana is by you, of you, and in you. It
must go on where you are. It cannot be outside you. So you are
the centre of dhyana and that is the Heart.
A location is however given to it with reference to the body. You
know that you are. Where are you? You are in the body and not
out of it. Yet not the whole body. Though you pervade the whole
body still you admit of a centre where from all your thoughts start
and wherein they subside. Even when the limbs are amputated you
are there but with defective senses. So a centre must be admitted.
That is called the Heart. The Heart is not merely the centre but the
Self. Heart is only another name for the Self.
Doubts arise only when you identify it with something tangible
and physical. The scriptures no doubt describe it as the source of
101 nadis, etc. In Yoga Vasishta Chudala says that kundalini is
composed of 101 nadis, thus identifying one with the other.
Heart is no conception, no object for meditation. But it is the seat
of meditation; the Self remains all alone. You see the body in the
Heart, the world in it. There is nothing separate from it. So all kinds
of effort are located there only.

Talk 404.
18th April, 1937
A casual visitor asked: What is nishta? How is the look to be directed
between the eyebrows?
M.: How do we see these things? There is a light by which these are
seen. Your question amounts to asking how that light is seen.
D.: What is the significance of the spot between the eyebrows?

M.: That is mentioned as if to say: “Do not see with your eyes.”
D.: What is regulation of breath for?
M.: Only to control the mind.
Again after a few minutes Sri Bhagavan continued: The mind
functions both as light and as objects. If divested of things the
light alone will remain over.
D.: But we must know that there is such light.
M.: Sight or cognition is impossible without such light. How do you
cognise anything in sleep? Our cognition pertains to the present
state because there is light. Light is the essential requisite for sight.
It is plain in our daily life. Among the lights, sunlight is the most
important. Hence they speak of the glory of millions of suns.
D.: There is light if we press the eyelids with our fingers.
Another questioner: What is the use of seeing such a light?
M.: It is done lest we forget the goal. The practice helps one not to
divert the attention to other pursuits.
The object is seen or the light is recognised because there is the
subject to do so. How does it affect the subject whether the objects
are seen or not? If the light, i.e., the cogniser or the consciousness
is seen, there will be no object to be seen. Pure light, i.e.,
Consciousness, will alone remain over.
D.: Why then is the regulation of breath necessary?
M.: Control of breath or its regulation is only for controlling the mind
so that the mind may not wander away.
D.: Is it for control of mind only?
M.: It is not enough that light is seen; it is also necessary to have the
mind engaged in a single activity, e.g., the elephant trunk and the
chain.
D.: How long will it take for one to gain Chintamani (the celestial
gem granting all the wishes of its owner)?
M.: The example of Chintamani is found in Yoga Vasishta. Chintamani
signifies the Real nature of the Self. The story is as follows:-
A man was making tapasya for gaining Chintamani. A gem
mysteriously fell into his hands. He thought that it could not be

Chintamani because his efforts had been too short and too little
to gain the gem. He discarded it and continued the tapas. Later
a sadhu placed before him a brilliant pebble with facets cut. The
man was taken in by its appearance but found that it could not fulfil
his desires as he originally supposed. Similarly, the Self, being
inherent, should not be sought for elsewhere.
Again, an elephant used to be often teased by its keeper. He once
had an accident and fell down. The elephant could have killed him
on the spot but did not do so. Later, however, the keeper dug a big
pit in the forest and killed the elephant.
Chudala illustrated Sikhidhvaja’s error by this story. He had vairagya
even while ruling his kingdom and could have realised the Self if
only he had pushed his vairagya to the point of killing the ego. He
did not do it, but came to the forest, had a timetable of tapas and yet
did not improve even after 18 years of tapas. He had made himself
a victim of his own creation. Chudala advised him to give up the
ego and realise the Self which he did and was liberated.
It is clear from Chudala’s story that vairagya accompanied by
ego is of no value, whereas all possessions in the absence of ego
do not matter.

Talk 405.
19th April, 1937
A respectable and orthodox gentleman asked about Sri Chakra.
M.: It has a deep significance. There are 43 corners with sacred
syllables in them. Its worship is a method for concentration of
mind. The mind is wont to move externally. It must be checked
and turned within. Its habit is to dwell on names and forms,
for all external objects possess names and forms. Such names
and forms are made symbolic mental conceptions in order to
divert the mind from external objects and make it dwell within
itself. The idols, mantras, yantras, are all meant to give food to
the mind in its introvert state, so that It may later become capable
of being concentrated, after which the superb state is reached
automatically.

Talk 406.
20th April, 1937
Mr. Cohen, a resident disciple, has been for some days past thinking
about a book called Nirvana written by a prominent Theosophist,
wherein the author claims to reach nirvana every night after going
to sleep. He claims to see his own Master and other Masters of the
Theosophical Society as bright lights within the ocean of light which is
nirvana. He asked Sri Bhagavan how it could be possible, considering
the Advaitic teaching that the nirvanic experience is the same as that
of the pure consciousness of Being.
M.: Nirvana is Perfection. In the Perfect State there is neither subject
nor object; there is nothing to see, nothing to feel, nothing to know.
Seeing and knowing are the functions of the mind. In nirvana there
is nothing but the blissful pure consciousness “I am.”
D.: How then can a prominent T. S. leader, who claims clairvoyance
of a high order, praise the author for his supposed correct and vivid
description of nirvana, and why is the T. Society so much obsessed
by the idea of ‘Service’?
M.: Well, Theosophy and other kindred movements are good inasmuch
as they make a man unselfish and prepare him for the highest truth.
Service, like prayers, japas and even business done in God’s name,
lead to the highest goal - Self-Realisation.
D.: But after how long? and why should a man who is ready for the
Absolute knowledge stick to the knowledge of the Relative?
M.: Everything happens in its own time. The one who is ready for
the absolute knowledge will be made somehow to hear of it and
follow it up. He will realise that Atmavidya is the highest of all
virtues and also the end of the journey.
Then, asked about the difference between external and internal nirvikalpa
samadhis, referring to article 391 above, the Master said:
External samadhi is holding on to the Reality while witnessing
the world, without reacting to it from within. There is the stillness
of a waveless ocean. The internal samadhi involves loss of bodyconsciousness.

D.: Is loss of body-consciousness a perquisite to the attainment of
sahaja samadhi?
M.: What is body-consciousness? Analyse it. There must be a body
and consciousness limited to it which together make up body-consciousness.
These must lie in another Consciousness which is
absolute and unaffected. Hold it. That is samadhi.
It exists when there is no body-consciousness because it transcends
the latter, it also exists when there is the body-consciousness. So
it is always there.
What does it matter whether body-consciousness is lost or retained?
When lost it is internal samadhi: when retained, it is external
samadhi. That is all.
A person must remain in any of the six samadhis so that sahaja
samadhi may be easy for him.
D.: The mind does not sink into that state even for a second.
M.: A strong conviction is necessary that I am the Self, transcending
the mind and the phenomena.
D.: Nevertheless, the mind proves to be a cord against attempts to
sink it.
M.: What does it matter if the mind is active? It is so only on the
substratum of the Self. Hold the Self even during mental activities.
D.: I cannot go within sufficiently deep.
M.: It is wrong to say so. Where are you now if not in the Self? Where
should you go?
All that is necessary is the stern belief that you are the Self. Say
rather that the other activities throw a veil on you.
D.: Yes, it is so.
M.: That means that the conviction is weak.
D.: I understand that the ‘I’ is only artificial (krtrima), my attempts
at realising the real ‘I’ are unavailing because the artificial ‘I’ is
brought into action for realising the other.
M.: Viveka Chudamani makes it clear that the artificial ‘I’ of the
vijnana kosa is a projection and through it one must look to the
significance (vachya) of ‘I’, the true principle.

Talk 407.
D.: St. Theresa and others saw the image of Madonna animated. It was
external. Others see the images of their devotion in their mental sight.
This is internal. Is there any difference in degree in these two cases?
M.: Both indicate that the person has strongly developed meditation.
Both are good and progressive. There is no difference in degree.
The one has a conception of divinity and draws mental images and
feels them. The other has the conception of divinity in the image
and feels it in the image. The feeling is within in both instances.

Talk 408.
21st April, 1937
With reference to the location of the Heart centre on the right side of
the human body, Sri Bhagavan said:-
I had been saying all along that the Heart centre was on the right,
notwithstanding the refutation by some learned men that physiology taught
them otherwise. I speak from experience. I knew it even in my home during
my trances. Again during the incident related in the book Self-Realisation I
had a very clear vision and experience. All of a sudden a light came from
one side erasing the world vision in its course until it spread all round
when the vision of the world was completely cut out. I felt the muscular
organ on the left had stopped work, I could understand that the body
was like a corpse, that the circulation of blood had stopped and the body
became blue and motionless. Vasudeva Sastri embraced the body, wept
over my death, but I could not speak. All the time I was feeling that the
Heart centre on the right was working as well as ever. This state continued
15 or 20 minutes. Then suddenly something shot out from the right to
the left resembling a rocket bursting in air. The blood circulation was
resumed and normal condition restored. I then asked Vasudeva Sastri to
move along with me and we reached our residence.
The Upanishads say that 101 nadis terminate in the Heart and 72,000
originate from them and traverse the body. The Heart is thus the centre
of the body. It can be a centre because we have been accustomed to
think that we remain in the body. In fact the body and all else are in
that centre only.

REMINISCENCES
Talk 409.
A middle-aged man prostrated himself before Sri Bhagavan, who
asked him about his well-being. After a few minutes Sri Bhagavan
recalled an incident saying that this was the only person whom Sri
Bhagavan had slapped; it happened about 30 years earlier.
Sri Bhagavan was living in Mulaippal Tirtha. There was a Jada Swami
living in the neighbourhood (Mamarathu Guhai). This man, who was
then about 8 years of age, used to play pranks with all, including Sri
Bhagavan.
One day he went to Maharshi and said that Jada Swami wanted a
bucket. Without waiting for permission, he took away the bucket.
Palani Swami the attendant, was not there. So Sri Bhagavan followed
the boy to Jada Swami’s place. Before Bhagavan reached the place the
boy had told the other that Brahmanaswami had sent him a bucket.
Jada Swami was wondering why! In a few minutes Maharshi reached
the place and learnt what had passed. So he raised His hand to give
a slap to the boy but the mind would not yield to slapping. But He
argued within Himself and determined that the urchin should be
slapped and so he did it.
Talk 410.
There is a Tamil stanza by Awai. It is an address of the prana to the
stomach; its meaning is:
“O stomach! How difficult it is to get on with you! You cannot starve
when no food is available, nor can you take more and keep it in reserve
when food is plenty! You will take only what you want and when you
want; thus you are troublesome to me, allowing me no rest.”
Sri Bhagavan altered it thus: Stomach addressing the prana: “O Prana!
How troublesome you are to me! You never allow me to rest but
continue loading me with food off and on. It is so difficult to get on
with you.”
Saying it Sri Bhagavan laughed. Sri Bhagavan often says that He is
made to eat more than is good for Him.

Talk 411.
21st May, 1937
Sri Bhagavan, while speaking of the marriage ceremony among the
Brahmins, said that the Kasiyatra represents the bridegroom to be a
vairagi-purusha. It is therefore right that he should be given a kanya
(virgin) for leading a householder’s life. It follows that a vairagi can
alone be a good householder.
Talk 412.
Once on a cold day Sri Bhagavan was sitting in a cave on the hill with
His hands folded on the breast as a protection against the cold. Some
Andhra visitor had come; he broke a coconut and poured the cold juice
on Sri Bhagavan’s head as abhisheka; Sri Bhagavan was surprised.
Talk 413.
A visitor asked: While making nama-japa and after continuing it for
an hour or more I fall into a state like sleep. On waking up, I recollect
that my japa has been interrupted. So I proceed again.
M.: “Like sleep.” That is right. It is the natural state. Because you
are now associated with the ego you consider the natural state to
be something which interrupts your work. You must repeat the
experience until you realise that it is your natural state. You will
then find that japa, etc., is extraneous. Still, it will be going on
automatically. Your present doubt is due to the false identity.
Japa means clinging to one thought to the exclusion of all other
thoughts. That is the purpose of japa; it leads to dhyana which
ends in Self-Realisation.
Talk 414.
Mr. G. V. Subbaramiah, a devotee, has written some short poems,
which are interesting. Some of them refer to a child. Sri Bhagavan said
God becomes a child, and vice versa. That means that the samskaras
are yet latent in the child and thus its innocence is complete. When
they are eradicated even a grown up man becomes a child once again,
and thus remains God.

The author said: The child creates the ‘home’ atmosphere.
Sri Bhagavan: Yes. The children are always in the ‘home’. We too
are there but are dreaming and imagining that we are outside the
home.
Sri Bhagavan added: I have rendered the word ‘youth’ (yuva)
in Dakshinamurti Stotra by ‘child’ (bala). This seems more
appropriate.
To be reborn is to become children over again. One must be reborn
before gaining jnana, i.e., recovering the natural state.
Talk 415.
Sri Bhagavan read out some stanzas on the greatness of the Tamil
language from the preface to a Tamil-Tamil Dictionary and explained
the references in a very interesting manner. Of the three tests for
establishing the superiority of Saivism over Jainism, the first related
to Tirujnanasambandar entering the royal presence for curing the
Pandya king of his illness. The queen was anxious because of his
tender age, i.e., 12 years. Tirujnanasambandar set her doubts at rest
by composing a stanza which said that, though tender, he was more
than a match to the strong group of innumerable Jains. While reciting
the stanza Sri Bhagavan choked and could not proceed with it.
The second test was the fire leaving the cadjan leaf unburnt, and the third
the cadjan leaves opposing the current of the river (Tiruvedakam).
Sri Bhagavan also related the story of God Isvara begging food as an
old man, taking food as a youth and saving the devotee woman as a
babe, all at once.
He again pointed out ‘like babe, lunatic, spirit’ (Balonmattapisachavat)
describing the states of jnanis. There babe (bala) is given precedence
over others.
Talk 416.
Sri Bhagavan said that Kamba Ramayana consists of 12,000 stanzas
to Valmiki’s 24,000. Kamba’s can be understood only by the learned
and not by all. Tulasidas had heard Kamba Ramayana recited to him
in Hindi by a Tamil saint and later wrote his famous Ramayana.

Talk 417.
The Perfect Master is a book on Meher Baba published in 1937.
There is an incident of a ship’s officer instructing the reluctant
Immigration Officer to let Baba and his party land in New York,
USA. When one of the party went to thank him he was nowhere
to be found.
The incident is recorded so as to leave an impression of a miracle
happening in favour of Baba. The passage was read out to Sri
Bhagavan.
Bhagavan said: Yes, yes, what of that?
D.: Is it a miracle?
M.: Maybe. But did not the Immigration Officer recognise the other
to be his superior officer whose orders should be obeyed? There is
an end of the matter. If a man of Baba’s party could not find him
- well, it may be due to several reasons.
Talk 418.
Asked if Sri Bhagavan had read Kamba Ramayana, Sri Bhagavan
said: No. I have not read anything. All my learning is limited to what
I learnt before my 14th year.
Since then I have had no inclination to read or learn. People wonder
how I speak of Bhagavad Gita, etc. It is due to hearsay. I have not
read Gita nor waded through commentaries for its meaning. When I
hear a sloka I think that its meaning is clear and I say it. That is all
and nothing more.
Similarly with my other quotations. They come out naturally. I realise
that the Truth is beyond speech and intellect. Why then should I project
the mind to read, understand and repeat stanzas, etc.? Their purpose
is to know the Truth. The purpose having been gained, there is no
use engaging in studies.
Someone remarked: If Sri Bhagavan had been inclined to study there
would not be a saint today.
M.: Probably all my studies were finished in past births and I was surfeit.
There is therefore no samskara operating now in that direction.

Talk 419.
The week before the Mahapuja (3rd June, 1937) has brought many
visitors including some relatives of Sri Bhagavan. There is among
them an elderly lady - the widow of Subbier in whose house Sri
Bhagavan was living when he left home in August 1896.
Old memories revived when Sri Bhagavan saw her.
He remembered how on a festive occasion he was asked to help her
in making some modakas (delicacies), but he hesitated and finally
refused, because he was obliged to change his clothes and he could
put on only koupina (loin-cloth or codpiece) which made him feel shy.
He was reprimanded by his uncle and this lady. The uncle’s wife said
with humility and gentleness: “Quite. No wonder that one destined
for this high state could not do such humble work in those days.”
Then Sri Bhagavan remarked, “If I refused to wear koupina once, I
am now made to pay the penalty by wearing it always.”
The lady recalled to her mind how Sri Ramana was suffering from
headache for several days together.
Sri Bhagavan said: Yes, yes! It was the month before I left Madura. It was
not headache, but an inexpressible anguish which I suppressed at the
time; these were however the outward symptoms which, I said, were
due to headache. I remember how anxious you grew on account of my
headache. You used to rub some ointment on my forehead every day.
My anguish continued until I left Madura and reached this place.

Talk 420.
4th June, 1937
A certain lawyer from Cuddalore quoted as follows: “Neither the
sun shines there, nor the moon, nor the stars, nor lightning. How
can fire shine there? All these luminaries shine in His Light only.
With His Light, all these shine forth!” He asked, what does ‘with
His Light’ mean here? Does all else shine on account of Him, or
in His Light?
M.: There is only He. He and His Light are the same. There is no
individual to perceive other things, because the perceiver and the
perceived are only He. The sun, the moon, etc., shine forth. How?

Do they come and tell you that they shine forth or does another
apart from them say that they shine forth?
D.: Of course I say that they shine forth.
M.: Therefore they shine on account of you. Again consciousness is
necessary to know that they shine forth. That consciousness is your
Self or you. So then you or your consciousness is the same as He
and His Light by which all else shine forth.
D.: Is that Light like sunlight?
M.: No. The sunlight is jada (insentient). You are aware of it. It
makes objects perceptible and chases away darkness, whereas
consciousness is that Light which makes not only light but also
darkness perceptible. Darkness cannot exist before sunlight,
but it can remain in the Light of Consciousness. Similarly, this
consciousness is pure Knowledge in which both knowledge and
ignorance shine.
D.: If God is all why does the individual suffer for his actions? Are not the
actions prompted by Him for which the individual is made to suffer?
M.: He who thinks he is the doer is also the sufferer.
D.: But the actions are prompted by God and the individual is only
His tool.
M.: This logic is applied only when one suffers, but not when one
rejoices. If the conviction prevails always, there will be no suffering
either.
D.: When will the suffering cease?
M.: Not until individuality is lost. If both the good and bad actions are
His, why should you think that the enjoyment and suffering are alone
yours? He who does good or bad, also enjoys pleasure or suffers pain.
Leave it there and do not superimpose suffering on yourself.
Talk 421.
A resident devotee, Kunju Swami, related an observation of Sri
Maharshi after the robbery in the Asramam in 1923.
Some disciples were asking why the robbers should be allowed to
molest even sadhus and why the sadhus would not protect themselves
and their dependents from the robbers.

Sri Bhagavan observed: There were rishis like Visvamitra who
could duplicate the universe if they wished. They lived during the
lifetime of Ravana who caused agony even to Sita and Rama among
others. Could not Visvamitra have destroyed Ravana by his occult
powers? Though capable he kept still. Why? The occurrences are
known to the sages, but pass away without leaving an impression on
their minds. Even a deluge will appear a trifle to them; they do not
care for anything.

Talk 422.
7th June, 1937
Dr. Venkata Rao, a visitor from Guntur, asked: A Guru asks his disciple
to do things contrary to ethical principles. But the disciple, having
accepted the person as the master, desires to please the master
but his moral sense obstructs him. What should he do under the
circumstances?
M.: (No reply).
D.: I shall make myself clear. The Guru asked his disciple to commit a
theft and the disciple did not do it. The master then said, “I wanted
to test you to see if you had completely surrendered yourself or
retained your individuality. It is now clear what it is.” Is the Guru
right in ordering the disciple that way?
M.: (Still no reply).
Another person observed: There are persons on whom I refuse to sit in
judgement. Still I cannot help feeling if they deserve the appellation
of Gurus. They appear bogus men. If they be really worthy they
would not order the disciples in that way.
M.: But the person says, “It is for a test.”
The questioner continued: Should it be carried out?
M.: Your original statement contains the answer to your question.
Both the questioners jointly asked: The action is disagreeable. Can
it be done?
M.: The question might be referred to the person himself, i.e., the
Guru. He is responsible for the situation.

Talk 423.
A young man asked: I try to cultivate will-power but do not succeed.
How should I do it?
M.: (No answer)
D.: I came here three years ago and Sri Bhagavan said that will-power
is necessary for strength of mind. Since then I have been desiring
to cultivate it but without success.
M.: (No answer)
D.: During these years I have had 4 or 5 reverses. They upset me
considerably. There is always the fear of failure haunting my attempts.
This results in want of faith in myself which certainly foredooms my
efforts to failure. Nothing in fact succeeds like success; and also nothing
foils one’s attempts like failure. Hence my question.
M.: (No answer).
D.: Is not will-power necessary for success? It should ensure success
and also rule out failure.
M.: (No answer)
D.: I try to gain will-power. After these years I find myself only where
I began. There is no progress.
M.: (No answer)
D.: What are the means for gaining will-power?
M.: Your idea of will-power is success insured. Will-power should be
understood to be the strength of mind which makes it capable for
meeting success or failure with equanimity. It is not synonymous
with certain success. Why should one’s attempts be always attended
with success? Success develops arrogance and the man’s spiritual
progress is thus arrested. Failure on the other hand is beneficial,
inasmuch as it opens the eyes of the man to his limitations and
prepares him to surrender himself. Self-surrender is synonymous
with eternal happiness. Therefore one should try to gain the
equipoise of mind under all circumstances. That is will-power.
Again, success and failure are the results of prarabdha and not of
will-power. A man may be doing only good and noble actions and
yet prove a failure. Another may do otherwise and yet be uniformly

successful. This does not mean that the will-power is present in the
one and not in the other.
D.: Is it not said in the book Truth Revealed (Ulladu Narpadu) that
the world is a product of the mind?
M.: Yes.
D.: Does it not follow that the mind grown strong brings the world
under control?
M.: The mind in its external activities gives rise to the world. Such
activities fritter away the strength of the mind. Its strength lies in
being confined to itself with the external activities arrested.
D.: There is an idiot who cannot count up to ten. His mind does not
certainly wander as does that of a thinker. Is the former a better
man than the latter?
M.: Who says that he is an idiot? Your mind in its wandering says so.
D.: Is will-power gained by divesting oneself of thoughts?
M.: Rather by confining oneself to a single thought. Ultimately
this will also disappear, leaving Pure Consciousness behind.
Concentration helps one to it.
D.: So then, it is gained by directing the mind and concentrating it.
The personality has nothing to do with it.
M.: Personality is the root-cause of external activities. It must sink
for gaining the highest good.
Talk 424.
In the course of conversation with a learned man who asked about
Purusha and Prakriti, Sri Bhagavan said:
Purusha and Prakriti are only the bifurcation of the one Supreme.
They are surmised because the student has the sense of duality deep
rooted. The same Gita also says that Purushottama lies beyond
Purusha and Prakriti.
D.: What are para-nadi, Sushumna nadi and the Heart?
M.: But Sushumna resolves into the para (Sushumnatu pareleena).
Heart is usually understood to be the muscular organ lying on the
left of the chest. The Modern Psychological Review speaks of the

physical organ on the left and the Heart centre on the right. The
Bible says that a fool’s heart is on the left and a wise man’s on
the right. Yoga Vasishta says that there are two hearts; the one is
samvit; and the other the blood-vessel.
D.: What is Anahata?
M.: Anahata is the chakra lying behind the heart. It is not samvit.
Lalita Sahasranama has it, Anahata chakrasthayai namo namah
(Salutations to the core situated in Anahata) and the next mantra
Hrit (in the Heart). Thus it is clear that Anahata is not the same
as Hrit.
Talk 425.
Will-power or any other is gained by practice (abhyasa).
D.: Is success not dependent on Guru’s Grace?
M.: Yes, it is. Is not your practice itself due to such Grace? The fruits are
the result of the practice and follow it automatically. There is a stanza
in Kaivalya which says, “O Guru! You have been always with me
watching me through several reincarnations, and ordaining my course
until I was liberated.” The Self manifests externally as Guru when
occasion arises; otherwise He is always within, doing the needful.

Talk 426.
12th June, 1937
Mr. Das, of Allahabad University: Has the food which one usually
takes anything to do with increase or decrease of one’s spirituality?
That is, does it influence spirituality for good or bad?
M.: Yes. Satvic food in moderate quantity is helpful to spiritual
development.
D.: For a grihi, i.e., a man of the world (householder), what conduct
in life will help him most spiritually?
M.: Dhyana or bhakti, which mean the same thing.
D.: What is meant by taking the name of God? How to reconcile the
following two ideas?
The Bible says: “Do not take the name of God in vain.”

The Hindu sastras enjoin taking the name of God all the time.
M.: One should not use the name of God artificially and superficially
without feeling. To use the name of God one must call upon Him
and surrender to Him unreservedly. After such surrender the name
of God is constantly with the man.
D.: What are the fundamental tests for discovering men of great
spirituality, since some are reported to behave like insane people?
M.: The jnani’s mind is known only to the Jnani. One must be a Jnani
oneself in order to understand another Jnani. However the peace of
mind which permeates the saint’s atmosphere is the only means by
which the seeker understands the greatness of the saint.
His words or actions or appearance are no indications of his
greatness, for they are ordinarily beyond the comprehension of
common people.
D.: Has man any Free-Will or is everything in his life predestined
and preordained?
M.: Free-Will holds the field in association with individuality. As long as
individuality lasts so long there is Free-Will. All the sastras are based on
this fact and they advise directing the Free-Will in the right channel.
Find out to whom Free-Will or Destiny matters. Abide in it. Then
these two are transcended. That is the only purpose of discussing
these questions. To whom do these questions arise? Find out and
be at peace.
D.: Are intellect and emotion, like the physical body, growths which come
with the birth of man; and do they dissolve or survive after death?
M.: Before considering what happens after death, just consider what
happens in your sleep. Sleep is only the interval between two
waking states. Do they survive that interval?
D.: Yes, they do.
M.: The same holds good for death also. They represent body-consciousness
and nothing more. If you are the body they always
hold on to you. If you are not the body they do not affect you. The
one who was in sleep is now in waking state just speaking. You
were not the body in sleep. Are you the body now? Find it out.
Then the whole problem is solved.

Similarly, that which is born must die. Whose is the birth? Were
you born? If you say you were, of whose birth are you speaking?
It is the body which was born and it is that which will die. How
do birth and death affect the eternal Self?
Think and say to whom the questions arise. Then you will know.
Talk 427.
D.: It is said that the Universe consists of light and sound. Are these
two constituents like the light and sound in the physical world?
Can they be seen and heard with the physical organs - eye and ear?
Or are they to be experienced only subjectively?
M.: Light and sound correspond to bindu and nada in Tantrik
terminology, and to the mind and life-current in the Vedantic. They
are gross, subtle and transcendental. The organs can perceive the
gross aspect; the other aspects are not so perceptible. The subtle
can be inferred and the transcendental is only transcendental.
D.: Hinduism lays down reincarnation of the jiva. What happens to
the jiva during the interval between the death of one body and the
birth of the next one?
M.: Solve this question by referring to the state of sleep. What happens
to you in sleep?
D.: I do not know.
M.: Yet you exist. Therefore existence beyond knowledge and ignorance is
indicated. Although ignorance was prevailing, according to your present
idea, yet you did not say so in sleep. You continued to exist all the same.
Mere ignorance does not rule out the fact of your existence.
D.: In the practice of meditation are there any signs of the nature
of subjective experience or otherwise, which will indicate the
aspirant’s progress towards Self-Realisation
M.: The degree of freedom from unwanted thoughts and the degree of
concentration on a single thought are the measure to gauge the progress.
D.: Is it necessary to take to sanyasa for Self-Realisation?
M.: Sanyasa is to renounce one’s individuality. This is not the same
as tonsure and ochre robes. A man may be a grihi; yet, if he does
not think he is a grihi, he is a sanyasi. On the contrary a man may

wear ochre robes and wander about: yet if he thinks he is a sanyasi
he is not that. To think of sanyasa defeats its own purpose.
Sri Bhagavan remarked: People see the world. The perception implies
the existence of a seer and the seen. The objects are alien to the
seer. The seer is intimate, being the Self. They do not however
turn their attention to finding out the obvious seer but run about
analysing the seen. The more the mind expands, the farther it goes
and renders Self-Realisation more difficult and complicated. The
man must directly see the seer and realise the Self.
D.: So then, it amounts to synthesising phenomena and finding the
one Reality behind.
M.: Why do you still consider the phenomena? See who the seer is.
Synthesis means engaging the mind in other pursuits. That is not
the way to Realisation.
D.: I want to eliminate the non-self so that the Self may be realised.
How shall I do it? What are the characteristics of the non-self?
M.: There is one who says that the non-self must be eliminated. Who
is he?
D.: I mean this man. When I travel from Calcutta to Madras I must
know Madras so that I may not alight at an intermediate station out
of ignorance. There are the sign boards and the timetable to guide
me in my travel. But what is the guide in my search for the Self?
M.: It is all right for the journey. You know how far away you are
from Madras. Can you tell me how far away you are from the Self
in order that you should seek it?
D.: I do not know.
M.: Are you ever divorced from the Self? Is it possible to be divorced?
Are not all these alien to you and the Self the most intimate? Where
should you go to gain the Self?
D.: I am now away from the Self. I must retrace my steps in order
to regain it.
M.: How far away? Who says that he is apart? Can there be two selves?
D.: It is said that individuals are modifications of the Self, just as
ornaments are of gold.

M.: When a man speaks in terms of ornaments ignoring their substance
gold, he is told that they are gold. But here the man is consciousness
and speaks of himself as its modification. Do you remain apart from
Self that you speak of yourself as Its modification?
D.: Cannot gold be imagined to say that it has become an ornament?
M.: Being insentient, it does not say so. But the individual is sentient
and cannot function apart from consciousness. The Self is Pure
Consciousness. Yet the man identifies himself with the body
which is itself insentient and does not say “I am the body” of its
own accord. Someone else says so. The unlimited Self does not.
Who else is he that says so? A spurious ‘I’ arises between the Pure
Consciousness and the insentient body and imagines itself limited
to the body. Seek this and it will vanish as a phantom. That phantom
is the ego, or the mind or the individuality.
All the sastras are based on the rise of this phantom, whose
elimination is their purpose. The present state is mere illusion.
Disillusionment is the goal and nothing more.
D.: The mind is said to be a bundle of thoughts.
M.: Because it functions on account of a single root the ‘I-thought’.

      

Manasantu kim margane krte naiva manasam marga arjavat.

It has no real existence as a separate entity.
D.: Are not thoughts projections from the mind?
M.: In that case the mind is taken to be synonymous with the ‘I-thought’ or the ego.

Talk 428.
15th December, 1937
Sri Bhagavan has selected 10 stanzas from the famous work of Sri
Sankara - Sivananda Lahari - describing devotion (bhakti):
(1) What is bhakti?
Just as the ankola fruit falling from the tree rejoins it or a piece of iron
is drawn to magnet, so also thoughts, after rising up, lose themselves

in their original source. This is bhakti. The original source of thoughts
is the feet of the Lord, Isvara. Love of His Feet forms bhakti. (61)
(2) Fruit of bhakti:
The thick cloud of bhakti, formed in the transcendental sky of the
Lord’s Feet, pours down a rain of Bliss (ananda) and fills the lake
of mind to overflowing. Only then the jiva, always transmigrating
to no useful end, has his real purpose fulfilled. (76)
(3) Where to place bhakti?
Devotion to gods, who have themselves their origin and end, can
result in fruits similarly with origin and end. In order to be in Bliss
everlasting our devotion must be directed to its source, namely the
Feet of the ever blissful Lord. (83)
(4) Bhakti is a matter only for experience and not for words:
How can Logic or other polemics be of real use? Can the ghatapatas
(favourite examples of the logicians, meaning the pot and the cloth)
save you in a crisis? Why then waste yourself thinking of them and
on discussion? Stop exercising the vocal organs and giving them
pain. Think of the Feet of the Lord and drink the nectar! (6)
(5) Immortality is the fruit of Devotion:
At the sight of him who in his heart has fixed the Lord’s Feet, Death
is reminded of his bygone disastrous encounter with Markandeya
and flees away.
All other gods worship only Siva, placing their crowned heads at
His feet. Such involuntary worship is only natural to Siva.
Goddess Liberation, His consort, always remains part of Him.
(65)
(6) If only Devotion be there - the conditions of the jiva cannot
affect him.
However different the bodies, the mind alone is lost in the Lord’s
Feet. Bliss overflows! (10)
(7) Devotion always unimpaired:
Wherever or however it be, only let the mind lose itself in the Supreme.
It is Yoga! It is Bliss! Or the Yogi or the Bliss incarnate! (12)

(8) Karma Yoga also is Bhakti:
To worship God with flowers and other external objects is
troublesome. Only lay the single flower, the heart, at the feet of
Siva and remain at Peace. Not to know this simple thing and to
wander about! How foolish! What misery! (9)
(9) This Karma Yoga puts an end to one’s samsara:
Whatever the order of life (asrama) of the devotee, only once
thought of, Siva relieves the devotee of his load of samsara and
takes it on Himself. (11)
(10) Devotion is Jnana:
The mind losing itself in Siva’s Feet is Devotion. Ignorance lost!
Knowledge! Liberation! (91)

Talk 429.
16th December, 1937
A few ladies had come from Bangalore. One among them asked:
The world is composed of differences, from our point of view. How
shall we able to get over these differences and comprehend the One
Essence of all things?
M.: The differences are the result of the sense of doership (kartritva).
The fruits will be destroyed if the root is destroyed. So relinquish
the sense of doership; the differences will vanish and the essential
reality will reveal itself.
In order to give up the sense of doership one must seek to find out
who the doer is. Enquire within; the sense of doership will vanish.
Vichara (enquiry) is the method.

Talk 430.
22nd December, 1937
A Marathi gentleman asked: I have read much about Self-Realisation;
I do japa, puja, etc.; nothing seems to satisfy me. Can Sri Bhagavan
kindly guide me?
M.: What is that you seek to gain? Everyone seeks happiness.
Happiness is one’s lot in everyday sleep. Bring about that state of
happiness even in the waking state. That is all.

D.: I do not follow. How is it to be done?
M.: Atma Vichara is the way.
D.: It seems too difficult to adopt, being so intangible. What shall I
do if I feel unfit for this method of enquiry?
M.: Guidance is there. It is for individuals to avail themselves of it.

Talk 431.
25th December, 1937
A Telugu gentleman stood up and asked: The mind is said to be pure
when all its vasanas are wiped out. It is also the finality. When there
is something to be gained is it not duality?
M.: Let the mind be first made pure. If the same question arises
thereafter the answer may then be sought.

Talk 432.
26th December, 1937
An Andhra visitor asked: What is sleep?
M.: Why, you experience it every day.
D.: I want to know exactly what it is, so that it may be distinguished
from samadhi.
M.: How can you know sleep when you are awake? The answer is to
go to sleep and find out what it is.
D.: But I cannot know it in this way.
M.: This question must be raised in sleep.
D.: But I cannot raise the question then.
M.: So, that is sleep.
Sri Bhagavan went out for a few minutes. On his return the same man asked:
Self-realised jnanis are seen to take food and do actions like others. Do
they similarly experience the states of dream and of sleep?
M.: Why do you seek to know the state of others, maybe jnanis?
What do you gain by knowing about others? You must seek to
know your own real nature.
Who do you think that you are? Evidently, the body.

D.: Yes.
M.: Similarly, you take the Jnani to be the visible body whereon
the actions are superimposed by you. That makes you put these
questions. The Jnani himself does not ask if he has the dream or
sleep state. He has no doubts himself. The doubts are in you. This
must convince you of your wrong premises. The Jnani is not the
body. He is the Self of all.
The sleep, dream, samadhi, etc., are all states of the ajnanis.
The Self is free from all these. Here is the answer for the former
question also.
D.: I sought to know the state of sthita prajnata (unshaken
knowledge).
M.: The sastras are not for the Jnani. He has no doubts to be cleared.
The riddles are for ajnanis only. The sastras are for them alone.
D.: Sleep is the state of nescience and so it is said of samadhi also.
M.: Jnana is beyond knowledge and nescience. There can be no
question about that state. It is the Self.
Talk 433.
Mr. Thomas, Professor of Sanskrit, University of Oxford, had presided
over the Oriental Conference in Trivandrum and on his way to Calcutta
he visited Sri Bhagavan. He is an elderly gentleman with a broad forehead
and a quiet manner. He speaks softly and slowly. He evinces great interest
in oriental literature, especially Sanskrit. He had heard of the richness of
Tamil. He desired to know which of the English translations of Srimad
Bhagavad Gita was the best. The hall was crowded and a few of them
mentioned, with each his own opinion, Thibaut’s, Mahadeva Sastri’s,
Telang’s, etc. Sri Bhagavan made mention of F. T. Brooks. Mr. Thomas
desires one in metrical form because it is the proper vehicle for rasa (the
essence) contained in it. Rasa is also Peace, he said.
M.: Yes, Brahman is only rasa.
D.: Rasa is also Bliss.
M.: Rasa, Ananda, Peace are all names for the same Bliss.
The Professor was shown Mr. Grant Duff’s speech in the Philosophical
Conference held at Paris. Later the book ‘Dharma’ by Dr. G. H. Mees

was placed in his hands, on seeing which he asked what Sri Bhagavan
thought of castes.
M.: The castes relate to bodies and not to Self. The Self is Bliss. To
realise Bliss one realises the Self. No need to worry oneself about
caste, etc.
D.: The ahamkar is also called the Self.
M.: Ahamkar is limited, whereas the Self is beyond it.
D.: There is much literature in English relating to Eastern philosophy
and religion. There are different exponents. The system of
Ramanuja is well presented. Prof. Radhakrishnan expounds
the advaitic system. He lays more stress on experience than on
evidence. Sankara shows a highly developed mind.
A discussion followed on direct perception. The Professor spoke
of mental perception also as different from sense perception.
M.: To infer one’s existence no other evidence is necessary. The
indriyas (senses) and the mind arising from the ego cannot serve
as evidence relating to the Self. The Self is their basis. They do not
exist independently of the Self. One’s own existence is self-evident.
Bliss is the Self. All become dear only owing to the love of Self.
D.: Love postulates duality. How can the Self be the object of love?
M.: Love is not different from the Self. Love of an object is of an
inferior order and cannot endure. Whereas the Self is Love, in other
words, God is Love.
D.: It is also the Christian idea.
He also asked Sri Bhagavan which of the methods was the best for
the attainment of the goal. Is not Patanjali’s the best?
M.: Yogas chitta vritti nirodhah - (Yoga is to check the mind from
changing) - which is acceptable to all. That is also the goal of all.
The method is chosen according to one’s own fitness. The goal for
all is the same. Yet different names are given to the goal only to suit
the process preliminary to reaching the goal. Bhakti, Yoga, Jnana
are all the same. Svasvarupanusandhanam bhaktirity abhidheeyate
(Self contemplation is called bhakti).
D.: Does Sri Bhagavan advocate advaita?

M.: Dvaita and advaita are relative terms. They are based on the sense
of duality. The Self is as it is. There is neither dvaita nor advaita.
I AM THAT I AM. Simple Being is the Self.
D.: This is not mayavada.
M.: The mind is maya. Reality lies beyond the mind. So long as the
mind functions there is duality, maya, etc. Once it is transcended
the Reality shines forth. Although it is said to shine forth Self-effulgence
is the Self.
D.: It is Sat-chit-ananda.
M.: Sat-chit-ananda is said to indicate that the Supreme is not asat
(different from unreal), not achit (different from insentient) and not
an anananda (different from unhappiness). Because we are in the
phenomenal world we speak of the Self as Sacchidananda.
D.: Aham ‘I’ applies to the individual and also to Brahman. It is rather
unfortunate.
M.: It is upadhi bheda (owing to different limiting adjuncts). The
bodily limitations pertain to the aham (‘I’) of the jiva, whereas the
universal limitations pertain to the aham (‘I’) of Brahman. Take off
the upadhi (limiting adjunct); the ‘I’ (Aham) is pure and single.
D.: Does Bhagavan give diksha (initiation)?
M.: Mowna (silence) is the best and the most potent diksha. That was
practised by Sri Dakshinamurti. Touch, look, etc., are all of a lower
order. Silence (mowna diksha) changes the hearts of all. There is
no Guru and no disciple.
The ajnani confounds his body with the Self and so he takes the other’s
body for the Guru. But does the Guru think his body to be the Self?
He has transcended the body. There are no differences for Him. So the
ajnani cannot appreciate the standpoint of Guru and of sishya.
D.: Is there then no difference between the one and the other?
M.: There are differences from the standpoint of the phenomenal
world but not from that of Reality.
The Professor was thankful. He hoped to appreciate Sri Bhagavan’s
writings better after having seen Him and conversed with Him.
In the course of conversation, Sri Bhagavan said that upasana and
dhyana are possible so long as there is the mind and they must cease

with the cessation of the mind. They are mere preliminaries to final
eradication of thoughts and the stillness of mind.
D.: Saiva Siddhanta postulates three fundamentals as being eternal.
Is it opposed to Vedanta?
M.: The three entities are jiva, God and bondage. Such trinities are
common in all religions. They are true so long as the mind is
operative. They are mere creations of the mind. One can postulate
God only after the mind arises. God is not different from the Self.
The Self is objectified as God. So also with Guru.
The Professor returned in the evening and asked something about
good actions. He further wondered why Brahman is said to be
sacchidananda, but not God.
M.: Sat denotes being beyond sat and asat; Chit beyond chit and
achit; Ananda beyond bliss and non-bliss.
What is it then? Even if not sat nor asat, It must be admitted to be
sat only. Compare the term jnana. It is the state beyond knowledge
and ignorance. Yet jnana is not ignorance but knowledge. So also
with Sat-chit-ananda.
D.: It favours the one aspect.
After a word about Atma-vichara he took leave saying that he would
not trouble Sri Maharshi any further although he had several doubts
yet to be cleared and that he wanted to make nididhyasana of what
he had heard so far.
A judge from Mysore asked: Upasana and dhyana were said to be
due to mental activities. Cessation of activities was also said to be
Realisation. Now, how to realise without upasana or dhyana?
M.: They are preliminaries. Such action will lead to the desired inaction.
D.: The Heart is said to be experienced on the right. Physiologically
it is on the left.
M.: Spiritual experience is spoken of.
D.: Is it the psychic heart?
M.: Yes.
D.: How to know that it is on the right?
M.: By experience.

D.: Is there any indication to that effect?
M.: Point out to yourself and see.

Talk 434.
28th December, 1937
Being Christmas holidays, there is a great rush of visitors from far and near.
A group of them sat down and two among them asked as follows:
D.: Do you know English?
Prompted to ask questions, he continued:
D.: Have you realised your Self?
Sri Bhagavan smiled and said, “Go on, continue.”
D.: Have you experienced nirvikalpa samadhi?
He was asked to finish his questions.
D.: Can you enter into nirvikalpa samadhi at will? Is it not necessary
that sages should influence their surroundings?
Another man asked: Can Sri Bhagavan help us to realise the Truth?
M.: Help is always there.
D.: Then there is no need to ask questions. I do not feel the everpresent help.
M.: Surrender and you will find it.
D.: I am always at your feet. Will Bhagavan give us some upadesha to
follow? Otherwise how can I get the help living 600 miles away?
M.: That Sadguru is within.
D.: Sadguru is necessary to guide me to understand it.
M.: The Sadguru is within.
D.: I want a visible Guru.
M.: That visible Guru says that He is within.
D.: Can I throw myself at the mercy of the Sadguru?
M.: Yes. Instructions are necessary only so long as one has not
surrendered oneself.
D.: Is no particular time necessary for meditation?

M.: Meditation depends on strength of mind. It must be unceasing, even
when one is engaged in work. Particular time is meant for novices.
D.: Will Sadguru place His hand on my head to assure me of His help?
I will have the consolation that His promise will be fulfilled.
M.: A bond will be the next requisition and a suit will be filed if you
imagine no help forthcoming. (Laughter).
D.: May I come near, Sir? (for blessing).
M.: Such doubts should not arise in you. They contradict your
statement of surrender. Sadguru is always on your head.
D.: Surrender comes after effort.
M.: Yes, it becomes complete in due course.
D.: Is a teacher necessary for instructions?
M.: Yes, if you want to learn anything new. But here you have to unlearn.
D.: Yet a teacher is necessary.
M.: You have already got what you seek elsewhere. So no teacher is
necessary.
D.: Is there any use of the man of Realisation for the seeker?
M.: Yes. He helps you to get rid of your delusion that you are not
realised.
D.: So, tell me how.
M.: The paths are meant only to de-hypnotise the individual.
D.: De-hypnotise me. Tell me what method to follow.
M.: Where are you now? Where should you go?
D.: I know ‘I am’; but I do not know what I am.
M.: Are there two ‘I’s then?
D.: It is begging the question.
M.: Who says this? Is it the one who is, or is it the other who does
not know what he is?
D.: I am, but do not know what or how?
M.: ‘I’ is always there.
D.: Does the ‘I’ undergo any transformation, say in death?
M.: Who witnesses the transformation?

D.: You seem to speak Jnana yoga. This is Jnana yoga.
M.: Yes, it is.
D.: But surrender is bhakti yoga.
M.: Both are the same
After some time the man continued: Then I have to conclude that I am
Consciousness and that nothing occurs except by my presence.
M.: It is one thing to conclude it by reasoning and another thing to
be convinced.
The other man continued: I shall wait three months and see if help is
forthcoming. Now, may I have the assurance?
M.: Is this what is asked by one who has surrendered?
Four visitors retired. The same man continued to say “Fulfil your
promise.” (Laughter).
He also said: God has given me enough for bread and butter and I am
happy. In addition I want peace of mind. Hence this request.

Talk 435.
29th December, 1937
Two ladies and two gentlemen from Ceylon.
D.: Have you realised God? If so, in what shape?
M.: Who remains there to see God? The question might well be if
one has known oneself.
D.: I have known myself.
M.: Is the ‘I’ different from the Self that you say you have known
the Self?
D.: I know the Self as identical with the body. If the Self be different
from the body let Bhagavan tell me how to see the Self separate
from the body. He has realised God. He can teach me.
M.: Why should the Self be separated from the body? Let the body
remain as it is.
D.: The soul when disembodied can see through all bodies.
M.: Are there others then? Or is there even your own body? Consider
your sleep - You do not know your body then. But still you are there

all the same. Did you then perceive the world through this or other
bodies? Nevertheless, you cannot deny your existence then. There must
be a subject to see the world and the subject must also be limited. If
unlimited how can there be others beside the unlimited Self?
D.: Does God have any limits?
M.: Leave God alone. What limits were there for your Self in your sleep?
D.: Death must then be the highest state.
M.: Yes. We are now living in Death. Those who have limited
the unlimited Self have committed suicide by putting on such
limitations.
D.: Concentrate on the Self, you say. How to do it?
M.: If that is solved everything else is solved.
D.: Know thyself, you say. How to know the Self?
M.: You now know that you are the body.
D.: Raja yoga realises through the body, senses, etc., and Sri Bhagavan
advises realisation by thinking. This is jnana yoga.
M.: How can you think without the body?
D.: God does not think.
M.: Why then did you start asking, “In what shape did you see God?”
D.: God must be felt through the senses.
M.: Are you not feeling God?
D.: Is everybody feeling God always?
M.: Yes.
D.: Then what is realisation?
M.: Realisation is to get rid of the delusion that you have not realised.
D.: I don’t catch the point.
They left, having taken a snapshot.
Talk 436.
D.: What is visvarupa?
M.: It is to see the world as the Self of God. In the Bhagavad Gita God
is said to be various things and beings, and also the whole universe.
How to realise it or see it so? Can one see one’s Self? Though not
seen, can the Self be denied? What is the Truth?

D.: Is it then wrong to say that some have seen it?
M.: It is true in the same degree as you are. The Gita begins saying
that no one was born; in the fourth chapter it says, “the numerous
incarnations, yours and mine, have taken place; I know them but
you do not.” Of these two statements, which is the truth? The
instruction is according to the listener’s understanding. If the
second chapter contains the whole Truth, why should so many
more chapters follow it?
In the Bible God says “I AM before Abraham.” He does not say
“I was” but “I AM.”
Talk 437.
M.: People have read of Vivekananda having asked Sri Ramakrishna,
“Have you seen God?” and imitate him now. They also ask, “Have
you realised God?”
I ask what is realisation.
Realisation implies perfection. When you are limited, your
perception also is limited. Your knowledge is thus imperfect. Of
what value is that imperfect knowledge?
In Visvarupa Darsan, Arjuna is told to see whatever he desired
and not what was presented before him. How can that darsan be
real?

Talk 438.
30th December, 1937
A visitor asked: For beginners like me which is most suited: either
worship of qualified God or contemplation of “I am Brahman”?
M.: The answer is contained in the question. The question itself shows
it to be worship of qualified God.
D.: “I” is felt in the waking and dream states but not in deep sleep.
Why so?
M.: If so, does it not exist in deep sleep?
D.: Because there are mental modes in these two states and no such
mode in the other.

Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Volume III
Talk 439.
3rd January, 1938
D.: Rama asks: “Brahman being Pure, how can maya arise from Him
and veil Him also? “Vasishta replies: “In pure mind associated with
strong dispassion this question will not arise.” Of course in advaita
(non-dualistic) philosophy there can be no place for jiva, Isvara
and maya. Oneself sinking into the Self, the vasanas (tendencies)
will entirely disappear, leaving no room for such a question.
M.: The answers will be according to the capacity of the seeker. It is
said in the second chapter of Gita that no one is born or dies: but
in the fourth chapter Sri Krishna says that numerous incarnations
of His and of Arjuna had taken place, all known to Him but not to
Arjuna. Which of these statements is true? Both statements are true,
but from different standpoints. Now a question is raised: How can
jiva rise up from the Self? I must answer. Only know Your Real
Being, then you will not raise this question.
Why should a man consider himself separate? How was he before
being born or how will he be after death? Why waste time in such
discussions? What was your form in deep sleep? Why do you
consider yourself as an individual?
D.: My form remains subtle in deep sleep.
M.: As is the effect so is the cause. As is the tree so is its seed. The
whole tree is contained in the seed which later manifests as the
tree. The expanded tree must have a substratum which we call
maya. As a matter of truth there is neither seed nor tree. There is
only Being.
D.: Vasanakshaya (total end of all predispositions) - Mano nasa
(annihilation of mind) - Atma-sakshatkara (Realisation of the
Self). They seem to be interdependent.

M.: The different expressions have only one meaning. They differ
according to the individual’s stage of progress. Dispassion,
Realisation, all mean the same thing; also they say ‘practice and
dispassion’. Why practice? Because the modes of mind once
subside and then rise up; again subside and rise up, and so on.
D.: Beginningless predisposition makes one do wrong. Without
jnana this predisposition cannot vanish. But jnana looks almost
impossible. Expiation alone cannot undo all the karma; for how
much expiation will be needed! Look where we will! Everything
looks difficult, even impossible. Association with the wise seems
to be the only cure of all ills.
M.: What is to be done? Reality is One only. How can It be realised?
Realisation is thus an illusion. Practice seems to be necessary. Who
is to practise? Looking for the doer, the act and the accessories
disappear.
Moreover, if Realisation is not present here and now, how can It,
newly got, be of any use? What is permanent must be eternally
present. Can it be newly got and be permanent also?
Realise what is present here and now. The sages did so before and
still do that only. Hence they say that it looks as if newly got. Once
veiled by ignorance and later revealed, Reality looks as if newly
realised. But it is not new.
D.: Karma, bhakti, yoga and jnana and their subdivisions only confuse
the mind. To follow the elders’ words seems to be the only right
thing to do. What should I hold? Please tell me. I cannot sift the
srutis and smritis; they are too vast. So please advise me.
(No answer.)
Talk 440.
D.: Without logic, without learned terminology, please instruct me
the way to the Bliss of Self. Let it be of Guru’s grace only.
M.: Have a clear idea of your requirement. Who seeks to gain what?
Then ask the method.
D.: Bliss manifests occasionally but I am unable to describe it. At
times there is illumination, but is it the Reality? If so, how to make

it permanent? The method must be simple. Please make it clear
without logic, learned discussions or mystifying words.
(No answer.)
Another visitor asked: Please tell me which is the most efficacious of
all the methods, e.g., prayer to God, Guru anugraha, i.e., master’s
grace, concentration of mind, etc.
M.: The one is the consequence of the other. Each of them leads to
the next stage. They form a continuous whole. God, Guru, and the
Self are not different. They are one and the same. Therefore the
methods offer no choice.
Talk 441.
Mr. Pannalal, I. C. S., a high Government official from Allahabad,
with his wife, a highly cultured lady, and Mr. Brijnarayan, a retired
judge, were on a visit for a week. The night previous to their departure
they wanted to have their doubt cleared. Their doubt was:
We had a great sage for our Guru. He advised us to “take the
name of Hari,” saying that it is all in all; no effort is necessary for
concentrating the mind. Concentration will come of itself if Harinam
is persisted in. So we are doing it. The Guru passed away. We felt
like a rudderless ship in mid-ocean. In our anxiety to find a safe
guide we read and heard of you and so desired to come here. Our
desire has been fulfilled after two years’ longing. On coming here
and hearing Sri Bhagavan we understand that the Master teaches
Atma-vichara (self-quest). This is the method of knowledge (jnana
marga), whereas the other master taught us bhakti marga (method
of devotion).
What shall we do now? Are we to give up the other method and
take to this new method? If once we change shall we not change
many times more according to the masters we meet? What progress
can be made by such frequent changes? Pray remove this doubt
and bless us.
The Master referred the gentleman to an article in the September
number of Vision, a monthly journal issued by the Anandasram.
Kanhangad.

PHILOSOPHY OF THE DIVINE NAME
ACCORDING TO ST. NAMDEV
The name permeates the entire universe densely; who can tell to what
depths in the nether regions and to what height in the heaven It extends?
The ignorant fools undergo the eighty-four lakhs of species of births,
not knowing the essence of things. The Name is immortal. Forms are
innumerable but Name is all that. The Name itself is form and form
itself is Name. There is no distinction between Name and form. God
became manifest and assumed Name and form. Hence the Name the
Vedas have established. Beware, there is no mantram beyond the
Name. Those who say otherwise are ignorant fools. Name is Keshava
Himself. This is known only to the loving devotees of the Lord.
The all-pervading nature of the Name can only be understood when
one recognises his own ‘I’. When one’s own name is not recognised,
it is impossible to get all-pervading Name. When one knows oneself
then one finds the Name everywhere.
None can realise the Name by the practice of knowledge, meditation or
austerity. Surrender yourself at first at the feet of the Guru and learn to
know who the ‘I’ in you is. After finding the source of that ‘I’, merge
your individuality in that Oneness - which is Self-existent and devoid
of all duality. It is that Name that permeates the three worlds.
The Name is Paramatman Itself where there is no action arising out
of dvaita (duality).

Talk 442.
8th January, 1938
While explaining a stanza of his own Sri Bhagavan observed: The sun
illumines the universe, whereas the Sun of Arunachala is so dazzling
that the universe is obscured and an unbroken brilliance remains. But
it is not realised in the present state and can be realised only if the
lotus of the heart blossoms. The ordinary lotus blossoms in the light
of the visible sun, whereas the subtle Heart blossoms only before the
Sun of Suns. May Arunachala make my heart blossom so that His
unbroken brilliance may shine all alone!
Further on, Sri Bhagavan continued: The mirror reflects objects; yet
they are not real because they cannot remain apart from the mirror.

Similarly, the world is said to be a reflection in the mind as it does not
remain in the absence of mind. The question arises: if the universe is
a reflection, there must be a real object known as the universe in order
that it might be reflected in the mind. This amounts to an admission of
the existence of an objective universe. Truly speaking, it is not so.
Therefore the dream illustration is set forth. The dream world has no
objective existence. How then is it created? Some mental impressions
should be admitted. They are called vasanas. How were the vasanas
in the mind? The answer is: they were subtle. Just as a whole tree is
contained potentially in a seed, so the world is in the mind.
Then it is asked: A seed is the product of the tree which must have existed
once in order that it may be reproduced. So the world also must have
been there some time. The answer is, No! There must have been several
incarnations to gather the impressions which are re-manifested in the
present form. I must have existed before as I do now. The straight way to
find an answer will be to see if the world is there. Admitting the existence
of the world I must admit a seer who is no other than myself. Let me find
myself so that I may know the relation between the world and the seer.
When I seek the Self and abide as the Self there is no world to be seen.
What is the Reality then? The seer only and certainly not the world.
Such being the truth the man continues to argue on the basis of the reality
of the world. Whoever asked him to accept a brief for the world?
Yoga Vasishta clearly defines Liberation as the abandonment of the
false and remaining as Being.
Talk 443.
A visitor asked: The illustration of the mirror relates to the sense of
sight only. The world is perceived by the other senses also. Can the
unreality be established in relation to the other senses as well?
M.: A figure on the screen in the cinema show appears to watch the
whole world. What is the reality behind the subject and the object
in the same show? An illusory being watches an illusory world.
D.: But I am the witness of the show.
M.: Certainly you are. You and the world are as real as the cinema
figure and the cinema world.

Talk 444.
An advocate visitor: The mind becomes aware of the world through
the senses. When the senses are active, one cannot help feeling
the existence of the world. How can karma yoga be of any use for
pure awareness?
M.: The world is perceived by the mind through the senses. It is of the
mind. The seer sees the mind and the senses as within the Self and
not apart from it. The agent, remaining unaffected by the actions,
gets more purified until he realises the Self.

Talk 445.
9th January, 1938
Explaining a stanza in Aksharamanamalai Sri Bhagavan said that
mowna is the highest form of upadesa. It signifies ‘silence’ as
master, disciple and practiser. Three sanyasins, who were visiting
Sri Bhagavan, began a discussion.
D.: If one remained quiet how is action to go on? Where is the place
for karma yoga?
M.: Let us first understand what Karma is, whose Karma it is and who
is the doer. Analysing them and enquiring into their truth, one is
perforce obliged to remain as the Self in peace. Nevertheless the
actions will go on.
D.: How will the actions go on if I do not act?
M.: Who asks this question? Is it the Self or another? Is the Self
concerned with actions?
D.: No, not the Self. It is another, different from the Self.
M.: So it is plain that the Self is not concerned with actions and the
question does not arise.
D.: I agree.
Another asked: What is the state of the realised man? Is he not
acting?
M.: The question implies that the realised man is not the questioner.
Why should you concern yourself with another? Your duty is to
look to yourself and not ask of others.

D.: The scriptures hold him up as the ideal.
M.: Certainly. He is the ideal. You should realise the Self. Even if his state
be now described, your understanding of it will be only according to
your capacity. You admit that your capacity is limited.
The scriptures say that the realised state admits of no limits. So
then, the only way to understand his state is to realise the Self and
experience the state. If the question arises afterwards the answer
will be found.
Another visitor asked: There is differentiation made between the
sentient and the insentient (chit and jada) in the opening verse of
Upadesa Sara.
M.: The Upadesa is from the standpoint of the hearer. There is no
truth in the insentient (jada). One whole consciousness (chit)
prevails all alone.

Talk 446.
24th January, 1938
Mr. Grant Duff was in the hall. Sri Bhagavan was mentioning some
new publications and Maha Yoga among others. He also remarked
that Mr. G. D. having read Sat Darsana Bhashya would be surprised
at the different view of Maha Yoga. Both claim to represent Sri
Bhagavan’s philosophy; but they differ so much that Maha Yoga
actually condemns the other.
Someone cited the curious claim of Sat Darsana Bhashya that
individuality is retained even after the loss of ego.
Sri Bhagavan remarked:
What is to be done? The Upanishads say: Brahmavid Brahmaiva
bhavati (Knower of Brahman becomes Brahman). There are more
than one Brahmavid at a time. “Are all of them the same? Are they not
separate?” So ask some persons. They look to the bodies only. They
do not look to the realisation. There is no difference in the realisation
of the Brahmavid. That is the Truth. But when the question is raised
from the standpoint of the body the reply is necessarily bound to be
“Yes. They are different”. This is the cause of the confusion.

Mr. G. Duff: The Buddhists deny the world; the Hindu philosophy
admits its existence, but says that it is unreal. Am I right?
M.: The difference of view is according to the difference in the angles
of vision.
D.: They say that Sakti creates the world. Is the knowledge of unreality
due to the unveiling of maya?
M.: All admit Sakti’s creation. What is the nature of the Creatrix?
It can only be in conformity with the nature of the creation. The
Creatrix is of the same nature as Her creation.
D.: Are there degrees of illusion?
M.: Illusion is itself illusory. Illusion must be seen by one beyond
it. Can such a seer be subject to illusion? Can he then speak of
degrees of illusion?
There are scenes floating on the screen in a cinema show. Fire
appears to burn buildings to ashes. Water seems to wreck vessels.
But the screen on which the pictures are projected remains
unscorched and dry. Why?
Because the pictures are unreal and the screen is real.
Again reflections pass through a mirror; but the mirror is not in any
way affected by the quality or quantity of the reflections on it.
So the world is a phenomenon on the single Reality, which is not
affected in any manner. Reality is only one.
The discussion about illusion is due to the difference in the angle
of vision. Change your angle of vision to one of jnana and then
find the universe to be only Brahman. Being now in the world, you
see the world as such. Get beyond it and this will disappear: the
Reality alone will shine.
Talk 447.
Sri Bhagavan said that a saint Namah Sivaya who was formerly living
in Arunachala must have undergone considerable difficulties. For he
has sung a song saying: “God proves the devotee by means of severe
ordeals. A washerman beats the cloth on a slab, not to tear it, but only
to remove the dirt.”

25th January. 1938
Talk 448.

LITERAL TRANSLATION OF NAMDEV’S
“PHILOSOPHY OF THE DIVINE NAME.”
I. The Name permeates densely the sky and the lowest regions and
the entire universe. Who can tell to what depths in the nether regions
and to what height in the heavens It extends? The ignorant undergo
the eighty-four lakhs of species of births, not knowing the essence of
things. Namdev says the Name is immortal. Forms are innumerable,
but the Name is all that.
II. The Name itself is form; and form itself is Name. There is no
distinction between Name and form. God became manifest and
assumed Name and form. Hence the Name the Vedas have established.
Beware, there is no mantra beyond the Name. Those who say
otherwise are ignorant. Namdev says the Name is Keshava Himself.
This is known only to the loving devotees of the Lord.
III. The all-pervading nature of the Name can only be understood when
one recognises his ‘I’. When one’s own name is not recognised, it is
impossible to get the all-pervading Name. When one knows oneself,
then one finds the Name everywhere. To see the Name as different from
the Named creates illusion. Namdev says, “Ask the Saints.”
IV. None can realise the Name by practice of knowledge, meditation
or austerity. Surrender yourself first at the feet of the Guru and learn to
know that ‘I’ myself is that Name. After finding the source of that ‘I’,
merge your individuality in that one-ness, which is Self-existent and
devoid of all duality. That which pervades beyond dwaita and dwaitatita,
that Name has come into the three worlds. The Name is Para Brahman
itself, where there is no action arising out of duality.
When Sri Bhagavan had read this, a certain musician came into the hall and
began to sing Tyagaraja Kirtanas in Telugu. One of them says: “Find the
source of the sound which is transcendental (mooladhara sabda) by
diving deep like a pearl-diver diving for pearls.” Then again another song
was: “For a man who has controlled his mind where is the use of tapasya?
Give up ‘I-am-the-body’ idea and realise ‘I am not; Thou art all’.”
This song was translated to Mr. G. D. who was then in the hall.

Mr. G. D. asked: Is it necessary to control one’s breath? What becomes
of the man who has not practised breath-control?
M.: Breath-control is only an aid for diving deep. One may as well dive
down by control of mind. On the mind being controlled, the breath
becomes controlled automatically. One need not attempt breath-control;
mind-control is enough. Breath-control is recommended
for the man who cannot control his mind straightaway.
Naham - I am not this - corresponds to rechaka
Koham - Who am I? (search for the I) - corresponds to puraka
Soham - He am I; (The Self alone) - corresponds to kumbhaka.
So these are the functions of pranayama.
Again the three formulae are:
Na - Aham (Not - I).
Ka - Aham (Who - I).
Sa - Aham (He - I).
Delete the prefixes and hold on to the common factor in all of them.
That is Aham-’I’, that is the gist of the whole matter.
Later on Sri Bhagavan referred to the songs and said: Tyagaraja says
well. The mind should be controlled. The question arises “What
is mind?” He himself answers in the next couplet, saying that it is
the “I-am-the-body” idea. The next question is how the control is
effected. He answers again, saying “By complete surrender. Realise
that I am not and that all is He.” The song is fine and compact. He
also mentions the other method, namely, control of breath.

Talk 449.
31st January, 1938
After Mr. G. D. had left, there was some reference to his visit to the Asramam.
Sri Bhagavan remarked, “Some Sakti draws people from all parts of the
globe to this centre.” A devotee aptly said, “That Sakti is not different
from Sri Bhagavan.” Sri Bhagavan immediately remarked, “What Sakti
drew me here originally? The same Sakti draws all others as well.”
Sri Bhagavan was, happily, in the mood to relate the following stories.

I. There was king with a devoted queen. She was a devotee of Sri
Rama and yearned that her husband should similarly be a devotee.
One night she found that the king mumbled something in his sleep.
She kept her ears close to his lips and heard the word ‘Rama’ repeated
continually as in japa. She was delighted and the next day ordered the
minister to hold a feast. The king having partaken of the feast asked
his wife for an explanation. She related the whole occurrence and
said that the feast was in gratitude to God for the fulfilment of her
long cherished wish. The king was however annoyed that his devotion
should have been found out. Some say that having thus betrayed God
he considered himself unworthy of God and so committed suicide. It
means that one should not openly display one’s piety. We may take
it that the king told the queen not to make a fuss over his piety and
they then lived happily together.
II. THONDARADIPODI (Bhaktanghrirenu) ALWAR: One who
delights in the dust of the feet of devotees. A devotee (of this name)
was keeping a plot of land in which he grew tulasi, the sacred basil,
made garlands of it, and supplied the same to the God in the temple.
He remained a bachelor and was respected for his life and conduct.
One day two sisters, who lived by prostitution, walked near the garden
and sat under a tree. One of them said, “How disgusting is my life that
I soil my body and mind every day. This man’s life is most desirable.”
The other replied, “How do you know his mind? Maybe he is not
as good as he appears to be. The bodily functions may be forcibly
controlled and the mind may be revelling in riotous thoughts. One
cannot control one’s vasanas as easily as the physical frame.”
The former said, “The actions are only the indices of the mind. His
life shows his mind to be pure.”
The other said, “Not necessarily. His mind has not been proved as yet.”
The first challenged her to prove his mind. She accepted. The second
desired to be left alone with only a shred of garment in which to clothe
herself. The first sister returned home, leaving the other alone with
flimsy clothing. As the latter continued to remain under the tree, she
appeared penitent and humble. The saint noticed her and approached
her after some time. He asked what had happened to her that she

looked so lowly. She pleaded penitence for her past life, desired to lead
a purer and nobler life and finished with a prayer to him to accept her
humble services in the garden or attendance on himself. He advised
her to return home and lead a normal life. But she protested. So he
detained her for watering the tulasi plants. She accepted the function
with delight and began to work in the garden.
One rainy night this woman was found standing under the eaves of
the thatched shed in which the saint was. Her clothes were dripping
and she was shivering with cold. The master asked why she was in
such a pitiable state. She said that her place was exposed to the rains
and so she sought shelter under the eaves and that she would retire as
soon as the rain ceased. He asked her to move into the hut and later
told her to change her wet clothes. She did not have dry cloth to put
on. So he offered her one of his own clothes. She wore it, still later
she begged permission to massage his feet. He consented. Eventually
they embraced.
The next day she returned home, had good food and wore fine clothes.
She still continued to work in the garden.
Sometimes she used to remain long in her home. Then this man
began to visit her there until he finally lived with her. Nevertheless
he did not neglect the garden nor the daily garlands for God. There
was public scandal regarding his change of life. God then resolved to
restore him to his old ways and so assumed the shape of the saintly
devotee himself. He appeared to the dasi and secretly offered her a
rich present, an anklet of God.
She was very pleased with it and hid it under her pillow. He then
disappeared. All these were secretly observed by a maid servant in
the house.
The ornament was found missing in the temple. The worshipper
reported the loss to the proper authorities. They offered a tempting
reward for anyone who would give the clue for the recovery of the lost
property. The maid servant afforded the clue and claimed the reward.
The police recovered the ornament and arrested the dasi who said
that the devotee gave her the same. He was then roughly handled. A
supernatural voice said. “I did it. Leave him alone.”

The king and all others were surprised. They fell prostrate at the man’s
feet and set him free. He then led a better and nobler life.
III. KADUVELI SIDHAR was famed as a very austere hermit. He
lived on the dry leaves fallen from trees. The king of the country heard
of him, saw him and offered a reward for the one who would prove
this man’s worth. A rich dasi agreed to do it. She began to live near
the recluse and pretended to attend on him. She gently left pieces of
pappadam along with the dry leaves picked by him. When he had
eaten them she began to leave other kinds of tasty food along with
the dry leaves. Eventually he took good tasty dishes supplied by her.
They became intimate and a child was born to them. She reported
the matter to the king.
The king wanted to know if she could prove their mutual relationship
to the general public. She agreed and suggested a plan of action.
Accordingly the king announced a public dancing performance by
that dasi and invited the people to it. They gathered there and she
also appeared, but not before she had given a dose of physic to the
child and left it in charge of the saint at home.
The dance was at its height here; the child was crying at home for
the mother. The father took the babe in his arms and went to the
dancing performance. She was dancing hilariously. He could not
approach her with the child. She noticed the man and the babe. She
contrived to kick her legs in the dance so as to unloose one of her
anklets just as she approached the place where the saint was. She
gently lifted her foot and he tied the anklet. The public shouted and
laughed. But he remained unaffected. Yet to prove his worth, he
sang a Tamil song meaning:
“For victory, let go my anger! I release my mind when it rushes
away. If it is true that I sleep day and night quite aware of my Self,
may this stone burst into twain and become the wide expanse!”
Immediately the stone (idol) burst with a loud noise The people were
astounded.
Sri Bhagavan continued:
Thus he proved himself an unswerving Jnani. One should not be deceived
by the external appearance of Jnani. Thus Vedantachudamani - V. 181.

Its meaning is as follows:
Although a jivanmukta associated with body may, owing to his prarabdha,
appear to lapse into ignorance or wisdom, yet he is only pure like the
ether (akasa) which is always itself clear. whether covered by dense
clouds or cleared of clouds by currents of air. He always revels in the
Self alone, like a loving wife taking pleasure with her husband alone,
though she attends on him with things obtained from others (by way of
fortune, as determined by her prarabdha). Though he remains silent like
one devoid of learning, yet his supineness is due to the implicit duality of
the vaikhari vak (spoken words) of the Vedas; his silence is the highest
expression of the realised non-duality which is after all the true content
of the Vedas. Though he instructs his disciples, yet he does not pose as
a teacher, in the full conviction that the teacher and disciple are mere
conventions born of illusion (maya), and so he continues to utter words
(like akasvani); if on the other hand he mutters words incoherently like
a lunatic, it is because his experience is inexpressible like the words of
lovers in embrace. If his words are many and fluent like those of an orator,
they represent the recollection of his experience, since he is the unmoving
non-dual One without any desire awaiting fulfilment. Although he may
appear grief-stricken like any other man in bereavement, yet he evinces
just the right love of and pity for the senses which he earlier controlled
before he realised that they were mere instruments and manifestations of
the Supreme Being. When he seems keenly interested in the wonders of
the world, he is only ridiculing the ignorance born of superimposition. If
he appears indulging in sexual pleasures, he must be taken to enjoy the
ever-inherent Bliss of the Self, which, divided Itself into the Individual
Self and the Universal Self, delights in their reunion to regain Its original
Nature. If he appears wrathful he means well to the offenders. All his
actions should be taken to be only divine manifestations on the plane
of humanity. There should not arise even the least doubt as to his being
emancipated while yet alive. He lives only for the good of the world.
Sri Bhagavan now warned the hearers against the mistake of disparaging
a Jnani for his apparent conduct and again cited the story of Parikshit.
He was a still-born child. The ladies cried and appealed to Sri Krishna
to save the child. The sages round about wondered how Krishna was
going to save the child from the effects of the arrows (apandavastra)

of Asvatthama. Krishna said, “If the child be touched by one eternally
celibate (nityabrahmachari) the child would be brought to life.” Even
Suka dared not touch the child. Finding no one among the reputed saints
bold enough to touch the child, Krishna went and touched it, saying, “If
I am eternally celibate (nityabrahmachari) may the child be brought to
life.” The child began to breathe and later grew up to be Parikshit.
Just consider how Krishna surrounded by 16,000 gopis is a
brahmachari! Such is the mystery of jivanmukti! A jivanmukta is
one who does not see anything separate from the Self.
If however a man consciously attempts to display siddhis he will
receive only kicks.

Talk 450.
3rd February, 1938
Miss Umadevi, a Polish lady convert to Hinduism, asked Sri Bhagavan:
I once before told Sri Bhagavan how I had a vision of Siva at about the
time of my conversion to Hinduism. A similar experience recurred to me
at Courtallam. These visions are momentary. But they are blissful. I want
to know how they might be made permanent and continuous. Without
Siva there is no life in what I see around me. I am so happy to think of
Him. Please tell me how His vision may be everlasting to me.
M.: You speak of a vision of Siva. Vision is always of an object. That
implies the existence of a subject. The value of the vision is the same
as that of the seer. (That is to say, the nature of the vision is on the
same plane as that of the seer.) Appearance implies disappearance
also. Whatever appears must also disappear. A vision can never be
eternal. But Siva is eternal
The pratyaksha (vision) of Siva to the eye signifies the existence
of the eyes to see; the buddhi (intellect) lying behind the sight; the
seer behind the buddhi and the sight; and finally the Consciousness
underlying the seer. This pratyaksha (vision) is not as real as one
imagines it to be, because it is not intimate and inherent; it is
not first-hand. It is the result of several successive phases of
Consciousness. Of these, Consciousness alone does not vary. It is
eternal. It is Siva. It is the Self.

The vision implies the seer. The seer cannot deny the existence
of the Self. There is no moment when the Self as Consciousness
does not exist; nor can the seer remain apart from Consciousness.
This Consciousness is the eternal Being and the only Being. The
seer cannot see himself. Does he deny his existence because he
cannot see himself with the eyes as pratyaksha (in vision)? No!
So, pratyaksha does not mean seeing, but BE-ing.
“To BE” is to realise - Hence I AM THAT I AM. I AM is Siva.
Nothing else can be without Him. Everything has its being in Siva
and because of Siva.
Therefore enquire “Who am I?” Sink deep within and abide as the
Self. That is Siva as BE-ing. Do not expect to have visions of Him
repeated. What is the difference between the objects you see and
Siva? He is both the subject and the object. You cannot be without
Siva. Siva is always realised here and now. If you think you have
not realised Him it is wrong. This is the obstacle for realising Siva.
Give up that thought also and realisation is there.
D.: Yes. But how shall I effect it as quickly as possible?
M.: This is the obstacle for realisation. Can there be the individual
without Siva? Even now He is you. There is no question of time.
If there be a moment of non-realisation, the question of realisation
can arise. But as it is you cannot be without Him. He is already
realised, ever realised and never non-realised.
Surrender to Him and abide by His will whether he appears or
vanishes; await His pleasure. If you ask Him to do as you please, it
is not surrender but command to Him. You cannot have Him obey
you and yet think that you have surrendered. He knows what is
best and when and how to do it. Leave everything entirely to Him.
His is the burden: you have no longer any cares. All your cares are
His. Such is surrender. This is bhakti.
Or, enquire to whom these questions arise. Dive deep in the Heart and
remain as the Self. One of these two ways is open to the aspirant.
Sri Bhagavan also added: There is no being who is not conscious and
therefore who is not Siva. Not only is he Siva but also all else of which
he is aware or not aware. Yet he thinks in sheer ignorance that he sees the

universe in diverse forms. But if he sees his Self he is not aware of his
separateness from the universe; in fact his individuality and the other
entities vanish although they persist in all their forms. Siva is seen as
the universe. But the seer does not see the background itself. Think
of the man who sees only the cloth and not the cotton of which it is
made; or of the man who sees the pictures moving on the screen in a
cinema show and not the screen itself as the background; or again the
man who sees the letters which he reads but not the paper on which
they are written. The objects are thus Consciousness and forms. But
the ordinary person sees the objects in the universe but not Siva in these
forms. Siva is the Being assuming these forms and the Consciousness
seeing them. That is to say, Siva is the background underlying both the
subject and the object, and again Siva in Repose and Siva in Action, or
Siva and Sakti, or the Lord and the Universe. Whatever it is said to be,
it is only Consciousness whether in repose or in action. Who is there
that is not conscious? So, who is not realised? How then can questions
arise doubting realisation or desiring it? If ‘I’ am not pratyaksha to
me, I can then say that Siva is not pratyaksha.
These questions arise because you have limited the Self to the body,
only then the ideas of within and without, of the subject and the object,
arise. The objective visions have no intrinsic value. Even if they are
everlasting they cannot satisfy the person. Uma has Siva always with
Her. Both together form Ardhanariswara. Yet she wanted to know
Siva in His true nature. She made tapas. In her dhyana she saw
a bright light. She thought: “This cannot be Siva for it is within
the compass of my vision. I am greater than this light.” So she
resumed her tapas. Thoughts disappeared. Stillness prevailed. She
then realised that BE-ing is Siva in His true nature.
Muruganar cited Appar’s stanza:- “To remove my darkness and
give me light, Thy Grace must work through ME only.”
Sri Bhagavan mentioned Manickavachagar’s:
“We do bhajana and the rest. But we have not seen nor heard of
those who had seen Thee.” One cannot see God and yet retain
individuality. The seer and the seen unite into one Being. There is
no cogniser, nor cognition, nor the cognised. All merge into One
Supreme Siva only!

Talk 451.
4th February, 1938
Mr. S. S. Suryanarayana Sastri, Reader in Philosophy, Madras
University, arrived this night. He had a doubt which he said had
been cleared on reading Sarma’s commentary on “Knowledge of
Self”. The doubt was:
How can the world be an imagination or a thought? Thought is a function
of the mind. The mind is located in the brain. The brain is within the skull
of a human being, who is only an infinitesimal part of the universe. How
then can the universe be contained in the cells of the brain?
Sri Bhagavan answered saying: So long as the mind is considered to
be an entity of the kind described, the doubt will persist. But what
is mind? Let us consider. The world is seen when the man wakes
up from sleep. It comes after the ‘I-thought’. The head rises up. So
the mind has become active. What is the world? It is objects spread
out in space. Who comprehends it? The mind. Is not the mind,
which comprehends space, itself space (akasa)? The space is physical
ether (bhootakasa). The mind is mental ether (manakasa) which is
contained in transcendental ether (chidakasa). The mind is thus the
ether principle, akasa tattva. Being the principle of knowledge (jnana
sattva), it is identified with ether (akasa) by metaphysics. Considering
it to be ether (akasa), there will be no difficulty in reconciling the
apparent contradiction in the question. Pure mind (suddha manas) is
ether (akasa). The dynamic and dull (rajas and tamas) aspects operate
as gross objects, etc. Thus the whole universe is only mental.
Again, consider a man who dreams. He goes to sleep in a room with
doors closed so that nothing can intrude on him while asleep. He
closes his eyes when sleeping so that he does not see any object. Yet
when he dreams he sees a whole region in which people live and move
about with himself among them. Did this panorama get in through the
doors? It was simply unfolded to him by his brain. Is it the sleeper’s
brain or in the brain of the dream individual? It is in the sleeper’s
brain. How does it hold this vast country in its tiny cells? This must
explain the oft-repeated statement that the whole universe is a mere
thought or a series of thoughts.

A Swami asked: I feel toothache. Is it only a thought?
M.: Yes.
D.: Why can I not think that there is no toothache and thus cure
myself?
M.: When engrossed in other thoughts one does not feel the toothache.
When one sleeps toothache is not felt.
D.: But toothache remains all the same.
M.: Such is the firm conviction of the reality of the world that it is
not easily shaken off. The world does not become, for that reason,
any more real than the individual himself.
D.: Now there is the Sino-Japanese war. If it is only in imagination,
can or will Sri Bhagavan imagine the contrary and put an end to
the war?
M.: The Bhagavan of the questioner is as much a thought as the Sino-Japanese war. (Laughter.)

Talk 452.
7th February, 1938
Mr. Dhar, I. C. S., a high Officer and his wife, both young, highly
cultured and intelligent, are on a visit here. But they fell ill since
they arrived here. She desired to know how meditation could become
steady.
M.: What is meditation? It consists in expulsion of thoughts. All the
present troubles are due to thoughts and are themselves thoughts.
Give up thoughts. That is happiness and also meditation.
D.: How are thoughts given up?
M.: The thoughts are for the thinker. Remain as the Self of the thinker
and there is an end of thoughts.
Mr. Dhar asked Sri Bhagavan why Brahma, who is Perfection, creates
and puts us to ordeals for regaining Him.
M.: Where is the individual who asks this question? He is in the
universe and included in the creation. How does he raise the
question when he is bound in the creation? He must go beyond it
and see if any question arises then.

Talk 453.
8th February, 1938
Three ladies are on a short visit here, Mrs. Hearst from New Zealand,
Mrs. Craig and Mrs. Allison from London.
One asked: What is the best way to work for world peace?
M.: What is world? What is peace, and who is the worker? The world is
not in your sleep and forms a projection of your mind in your jagrat. It
is therefore an idea and nothing else. Peace is absence of disturbance.
The disturbance is due to the arising of thoughts in the individual,
who is only the ego rising up from Pure Consciousness.
To bring about peace means to be free from thoughts and to abide
as Pure Consciousness. If one remains at peace oneself, there is
only peace all about.
D.: If it is a question of doing something one considers wrong, and hereby
saving someone else from a great wrong, should one do it or refrain?
M.: What is right and wrong? There is no standard by which to
judge something to be right and another to be wrong. Opinions
differ according to the nature of the individual and according to
the surroundings. They are again ideas and nothing more. Do not
worry about them. But get rid of thoughts. If you always remain
in the right, then right will prevail in the world.
D.: What should one think of when meditating?
M.: What is meditation? It is expulsion of thoughts. You are perturbed
by thoughts which rush one after another. Hold on to one thought
so that others are expelled. Continuous practice gives the necessary
strength of mind to engage in meditation.
Meditation differs according to the degree of advancement of the
seeker. If one is fit for it one might directly hold the thinker; and
the thinker will automatically sink into his source, namely Pure
Consciousness.
If one cannot directly hold the thinker one must meditate on God;
and in due course the same individual will have become sufficiently
pure to hold the thinker and sink into absolute Being.

One of the ladies was not satisfied with this answer and asked for
further elucidation.
Sri Bhagavan then pointed out that to see wrong in another is
one’s own wrong. The discrimination between right and wrong
is the origin of the sin. One’s own sin is reflected outside and the
individual in ignorance superimposes it on another. The best course
for one is to reach the state in which such discrimination does not
arise. Do you see wrong or right in your sleep? Did you not exist
in sleep? Be asleep even in the wakeful state. Abide as the Self and
remain uncontaminated by what goes on around.
Moreover, however much you might advise them, your hearers may
not rectify themselves. Be in the right yourself and remain silent.
Your silence will have more effect than your words or deeds. That
is the development of will-power. Then the world becomes the
Kingdom of Heaven, which is within you.
D.: If one is to withdraw oneself, why is there the world?
M.: Where is the world and where does one go withdrawing oneself?
Does one fly in an aeroplane beyond space? Is it withdrawal?
The fact is this: the world is only an idea. What do you say: Are
you within the world or is the world within you?
D.: I am in the world. I am part of it.
M.: That is the mistake. If the world were to exist apart from you, does
it come and tell you that it exists? No, you see it exists. You see it
when you are awake and not when asleep. If it exists apart from you,
it must tell you so and you must be aware of it even in your sleep.
D.: I became aware of it in my jagrat.
M.: Do you become aware of yourself and then of the world? Or do
you become aware of the world and then of yourself? Or do you
become aware of both simultaneously?
D.: I must say simultaneously.
M.: Were you or were you not, before becoming aware of yourself? Do
you admit your continued existence before and when you become
aware of the world?
D.: Yes.

M.: If always existing yourself, why are you not aware of the world
in sleep if it exists apart from the Self?
D.: I become aware of myself and of the world also.
M.: So you become aware of yourself. Who becomes aware of whom?
Are there two selves?
D.: No.
M.: So you see that it is wrong to suppose that awareness has passing
phases. The Self is always aware. When the Self identifies itself as
the seer it sees objects. The creation of the subject and the object is
the creation of the world. Subjects and objects are creations in Pure
Consciousness. You see pictures moving on the screen in a cinema
show. When you are intent on the pictures you are not aware of the
screen. But the pictures cannot be seen without the screen behind.
The world stands for the pictures and Consciousness stands for
the screen. The Consciousness is pure. It is the same as the Self
which is eternal and unchanging. Get rid of the subject and object
and Pure Consciousness will alone remain.
D.: But why did Pure Brahman become Isvara and manifest the
universe if He did not mean it?
M.: Did Brahman or Isvara tell you so? You say that Brahman became
Isvara, and so on. This too you did not say in your sleep. Only in
your jagrat state you speak of Brahman, Isvara and universe. The
jagrat state is a duality of subject and object - owing to the rise of
thoughts. So they are your thought creations.
D.: But the world exists in my sleep even though I am not aware.
M.: What is the proof of its existence?
D.: Others are aware of it.
M.: Do they say so to you when you are in sleep or do you become
aware of others who see the world in your sleep?
D.: No, but God is always aware.
M.: Leave God alone. Speak for yourself. You do not know God. He
is only what you think of Him. Is he apart from you? He is that
Pure Consciousness in which all ideas are formed. You are that
Consciousness.

Talk 454.
10th February, 1938
Mrs. Dhar: Sri Bhagavan advises practice of enquiry even when one
is engaged in external activities. The finality of such enquiry is
the realisation of the Self and consequently breath must stop. If
breath should stop, how will work go on or, in other words, how
will breath stop when one is working?
M.: There is confusion between the means and the end (i.e., sadhana
and sadhya). Who is the enquirer? The aspirant and not the siddha.
Enquiry signifies that the enquirer considers himself separate from
enquiry.
So long as this duality lasts the enquiry must be continued, i.e.,
until the individuality disappears and the Self is realised to be only
the eternal Be-ing (including enquiry and enquirer).
The Truth is that Self is constant and unintermittent Awareness. The
object of enquiry is to find the true nature of the Self as Awareness.
Let one practise enquiry so long as separateness is perceived.
If once realisation arises there is no further need for enquiry. The
question will also not arise. Can awareness ever think of questioning
who is aware? Awareness remains pure and simple.
The enquirer is aware of his own individuality. Enquiry does not
stand in the way of his individual awareness; nor does external work
interfere with such awareness. If work, seemingly external, does
not obstruct the individual awareness, will the work, realised to be
not separate from the Self, obstruct the uninterrupted Awareness
of the Self, which is One without a second and which is not an
individual separate from work?
Talk 455.
Mrs. Dhar: I form part of the creation and so remain dependent. I
cannot solve the riddle until I become independent. Yet I ask Sri
Bhagavan, should He not answer the question for me?
M.: Yes. It is Bhagavan that says, “Become independent and solve the
riddle yourself. It is for you to do it.” Again: where are you now that
you ask this question? Are you in the world, or is the world within

you? You must admit that the world is not perceived in your sleep
although you cannot deny your existence then. The world appears
when you wake up. So where is it? Clearly the world is your thought.
Thoughts are your projections. The ‘I’ is first created and then the
world. The world is created by the ‘I’ which in its turn rises up from
the Self. The riddle of the creation of the world is thus solved if you
solve the creation of the ‘I’. So I say, find your Self.
Again, does the world come and ask you “Why do ‘I’ exist? How
was ‘I’ created?” It is you who ask the question. The questioner
must establish the relationship between the world and himself. He
must admit that the world is his own imagination. Who imagines
it? Let him again find the ‘I’ and then the Self.
Moreover, all the scientific and theological explanations do not
harmonise. The diversities in such theories clearly show the
uselessness of seeking such explanations. Such explanations are
purely mental or intellectual and nothing more. Still, all of them
are true according to the standpoint of the individual. There is no
creation in the state of realisation. When one sees the world, one
does not see oneself. When one sees the Self, the world is not seen.
So see the Self and realise that there has been no creation.
The lady being laid up is unable to go to the hall and so feels
unhappy that, though near, she cannot go into the hall. This was
mentioned to Sri Bhagavan. He said, “Well, thinking like this keeps
her always in the Presence. This is better than remaining in the hall
and thinking of something else.”

Talk 456.
11th February, 1938

CONTACT WITH SAINTS
A DANGER:
“Seek the company of saints by all means; but do not remain indefinitely
with them. The adage, familiarity breeds contempt, applies even to their
case,” writes Swami Ramdas in the course of an article in The Vision.
“Spiritual growth is, no doubt, largely dependent on suitable association.
Company of saints is, therefore, held to be essential for a seeker after

truth. But it must not be understood by the company of saints to mean
that the seeker should permanently stick on to them.
“He may, for a brief period, remain in their contact and, thereby
drawing inspiration and guidance, get himself thoroughly awakened
to the consciousness of the indwelling Reality. It would be well for
him to depart from them before the light and inspiration that he has
received diminishes or disappears.
MAY TURN SCOFFERS:
“There are many cases known to the writer and many others of which he
has heard and read, in which such continued dwelling in the company of
saints has not only cooled down the ardour and aspiration of the seekers
but also turned them into scoffers and sceptics. The fall of a sadhak
from faith, purity and aspiration does him incalculable harm.
“A young plant growing beneath the shade of a full-grown giant tree
does not develop strength and stature. Its growth will be dwarfed,
shrivelled and diseased. Whereas if the same plant were put into the
open ground directly exposed to the storms, heat, cold, and other
rigours of changing weather, it is bound to grow into a mighty tree
drawing sustenance both from above and below.
STIFLED GROWTH:
“This analogy of the plant aptly illustrates the stunted life of a seeker
who is attached merely to the outward personality of a saint and
spends all his days in close association with him. Here the initiative
for a free expression of his unique spiritual possibilities is stifled.
He fails to cultivate the fundamental qualities for his advancement
- fearlessness, self-dependence and endurance. The one great Guide
that should control his mind, speech and body should be the almighty
Spirit within him. To surrender to this Spirit and become its very
embodiment is his goal. To stand on his own legs, struggle and grow
by his own strength and experience and lastly to hand himself over to
God by his own endeavour brings true liberation and peace.
“From what has been said above, it must not be construed that
reflection is cast upon the greatness and efficacy of the company of

God-realised souls. Such a contact is the most effective means for a
rapid spiritual evolution of the soul. In fact, the grace of saints is an
invaluable aid for sadhana and without it the condition of the aspirant
is like a bird beating in vain its wings against the bars of the cage for
freedom. Saints are the saviours and liberators.
The Hindu conception of a saint is that he is the very embodiment of
God himself. So honour him, derive the rare benefit of his society,
serve him with a frank and pure heart, listen intently to his words of
advice, and strive to act up to them and achieve the fullest knowledge
of the Truth you are in quest of.
But seek not to remain attached to his person and lose the spiritual
gifts you obtained from him by first contacts.”
This cutting was read out to Sri Bhagavan. He listened and remained
silent. He was requested to say if contact with saints could be a danger.
Sri Bhagavan then quoted a Tamil stanza which says that contact with
Guru should be kept up till videhamukti (being disembodied).
Again he asked where is the Satpurusha? He is within. Then he quoted
another stanza meaning:
“O Master, Who has been within me in all my past incarnations
and Who manifested as a human being, only to speak the language
understood by me and lead me.”

Talk 457.
12th February, 1938
Mrs. Rosita Forbes was said to be in India. Sri Bhagavan said: The
explorers seek happiness in finding curiosities, discovering new lands and
undergoing risks in adventures. They are thrilling. But where is pleasure
found? Only within. Pleasure is not to be sought in the external world.

Talk 458.
13th February, 1938
Sri Bhagavan said that non-dual idea is advised, but not advaita in
action. How will one learn advaita, if one does not find a master and
receive instructions? Is there not duality then? That is the meaning.

Talk 459.
14th February, 1938
Quoting Alexander Selkirk’s soliloquy, Sri Bhagavan said: The
happiness of solitude is not found in retreats. It may be had even
in busy centres. Happiness is not to be sought in solitude or in busy
centres. It is in the Self.

Talk 460.
17th February, 1938
Observing the moon before the rising sun, Sri Bhagavan remarked:
See the moon and also the cloud in the sky. There is no difference in their
brilliance. The moon looks only like a speck of cloud. The jnani’s mind
is like this moon before sunlight. It is there but not shining of itself.

Talk 461.
18th February, 1938
As Sri Bhagavan was going through the letters which arrived this day,
He read out one of them as follows:
A Brahmin boy working in a household went to sleep as usual. In his
sleep he cried out. When he woke up he said that he felt his prana
going out of the body through the mouth and nostrils. So he cried.
Soon after he found himself dead and the soul taken to Vaikunta
where God Vishnu was surrounded by other gods and devotees with
prominent Vaishnavite marks on their foreheads. Vishnu said, “This
man should be brought here at 2 o’clock tomorrow. Why has he been
brought here now? “The boy then woke up and related his experience.
The next day at 2 o’clock he passed away.

Talk 462.
19th February, 1938
Mrs. Dhar had been anxious to ask some questions and get help from Sri
Bhagavan. She approached Him with great hesitation and gently related her
troubles: My attempts at concentration are frustrated by sudden palpitations
of the heart and accompanying hard, short and quick breaths. Then my
thoughts also rush out and the mind becomes uncontrollable. Under healthy
conditions I am more successful and my breath comes to a standstill with deep

concentration. I had long been anxious to get the benefit of Sri Bhagavan’s
proximity for the successful culmination of my meditation and so came
here after considerable effort. I fell ill here. I could not meditate and so I felt
depressed. I made a determined effort to concentrate my mind even though
I was troubled by short and quick breaths. Though partly successful it does
not satisfy me. The time for my leaving the place is drawing near. I feel more
and more depressed as I contemplate leaving the place. Here I find people
obtaining peace by meditation in the hall; whereas I am not blessed with such
peace. This itself has a depressing effect on me.
M.: This thought, ‘I am not able to concentrate,’ is itself an obstacle.
Why should the thought arise?
D.: Can one remain without thoughts rising all the 24 hours of the
day? Should I remain without meditation?
M.: What is ‘hours’ again? It is a concept. Each question of yours is
prompted by a thought.
Your nature is Peace and Happiness. Thoughts are the obstacles to
realisation. One’s meditation or concentration is meant to get rid of
obstacles and not to gain the Self. Does anyone remain apart from
the Self? No! The true nature of the Self is declared to be Peace. If
the same peace is not found, the non-finding is only a thought which
is alien to the Self. One practises meditation only to get rid of these
alien fancies. So, then, a thought must be quelled as soon as it rises.
Whenever a thought arises, do not be carried away by it. You become
aware of the body when you forget the Self. But can you forget the
Self? Being the Self how can you forget it? There must be two selves
for one to forget the other. It is absurd. So the Self is not depressed; it
is not imperfect: it is ever happy. The contrary feeling is a mere thought
which has actually no stamina in it. Be rid of thoughts. Why should
one attempt meditation? Being the Self one remains always realised,
only be free from thoughts.
You think that your health does not permit your meditation. This
depression must be traced to its origin. The origin is the wrong
identification of the body with the Self. The disease is not of the
Self. It is of the body. But the body does not come and tell you that
it is possessed by the disease. It is you who say it. Why? Because
you have wrongly identified yourself with the body.

The body itself is a thought. Be as you really are. There is no reason
to be depressed.
The lady was called away and she retired. The question was
however pursued as follows:
D.: Sri Bhagavan’s answers do not permit us to put further questions,
not because our minds are peaceful but we are unable to argue the
point. Our discontent is not at an end. For the physical ailments
to go the mental ailments should go. Both go when thoughts go.
Thoughts do not go without effort. Effort is not possible with the
present weakness of mind. The mind requires grace to gain strength.
Grace must manifest only after surrender. So all questions, wittingly
or unwittingly, amount to asking for Sri Bhagavan’s Grace.
M.: Smiled and said, “Yes.”
D.: Surrender is said to be bhakti. But Sri Bhagavan is known to favour
enquiry for the Self. There is thus confusion in the hearer.
M.: Surrender can take effect only when done with full knowledge.
Such knowledge comes after enquiry. It ends in surrender.
D.: The knowledge of the Supreme Being is after transcending the
individual self. This is jnana. Where is the need for surrender?
M.: Quite so. There is no difference between jnana and surrender. (Smile).
D.: How is the questioner satisfied then? The only alternative left is association
with the wise or devotion to God (satsanga or Isvara bhakti).
M.: Smiled and said, “Yes.”

Talk 463.
21st February, 1938
In the course of the conversation Sri Bhagavan spoke appreciatingly
of the services of Palanisami and Ayyasami - his former attendants.
He said that they raised in the garden two crude platforms which were
occupied by Himself and Palanisami; they were most comfortable. They
were made of straw and bamboo mats and were even more comfortable
than the sofa here. Palanisami used to pass through the footpath between
rows of prickly pear to bring begged food every night from Kizhnathoor.
Though Sri Bhagavan protested Palanisami persisted in doing so. He was

free from greed or attachment of any kind. He had earned some money
by service in the Straits Settlements and deposited his small savings with
someone in the town from whom he used to draw in his emergencies. He
was offered a comfortable living in his native village which he refused
and continued to live with Sri Bhagavan till the end.
Ayyasami had worked under a European in South Africa and was
clean, active and capable. He could manage even ten asramams at a
time. He was also free from any attachment or greed. He was loyal to
Palanisami, even fond of him. He was more capable than the other.
Annamalai first visited Maharshi in Virupaksha cave; he later went to
Kovilur and studied some Tamil scriptures. He returned to Skandasramam.
He died in January, 1922 in his 29th year. In the meantime he had
composed 36 stanzas in Tamil full of significance and fervour.
Sri Bhagavan had them read out and briefly explained their meaning.

Talk 464.
5th March, 1938
A passage from Arunachala Mahatmya (the Glory of Arunachala) was
read out. It related to Pangunni (a lame sage) who had his legs made whole
by the grace of Sri Arunachala. Sri Bhagavan then related the story of a
man whom Sri Maharshi had seen when He was in Gurumurtham. The
man was one Kuppu Iyer. His legs were useless and he could not walk.
He was once on his way to Vettavalam, moving on his buttocks. An old
man suddenly appeared before him and said “Get up and walk. Why
do you move on your buttocks?” Kuppu Iyer was excited and beside
himself. Involuntarily he rose up and walked freely. After going a short
distance, he looked behind to see the stranger who made him walk. But
he could not find anyone. He narrated the incident to all those who were
surprised to see him walk. Any old man in the town can bear witness to
Kuppu Iyer regaining the use of his legs.
Again a girl from the Girl’s School was decoyed and was being robbed
of her jewels. Suddenly an old man appeared on the scene, rescued
the girl, escorted her to her home and then disappeared.
Often such mysterious happenings occur in Tiruvannamalai.

Talk 465.
6th March, 1938
Sri Bhagavan explained to a retired Judge of the High Court some
points in the Upadesa Saram as follows:-
(1) Meditation should remain unbroken as a current. If unbroken
it is called samadhi or Kundalini sakti.
(2) The mind may be latent and merge in the Self; it must necessarily
rise up again; after it rises up one finds oneself only as ever before.
For in this state the mental predispositions are present there in latent
form to remanifest under favourable conditions.
(3) Again the mind activities can be completely destroyed. This differs
from the former mind, for here the attachment is lost, never to reappear.
Even though the man sees the world after he has been in the samadhi
state, the world will be taken only at its worth, that is to say it is the
phenomenon of the One Reality. The True Being can be realised only
in samadhi; what was then is also now. Otherwise it cannot be Reality
or Ever-present Being. What was in samadhi is here and now too.
Hold it and it is your natural condition of Being. Samadhi practice
must lead to it. Otherwise how can nirvikalpa samadhi be of any
use in which a man remains as a log of wood? He must necessarily
rise up from it sometime or other and face the world. But in sahaja
samadhi he remains unaffected by the world.
So many pictures pass over the cinema screen: fire burns away
everything; water drenches all; but the screen remains unaffected.
The scenes are only phenomena which pass away leaving the screen
as it was. Similarly the world phenomena simply pass on before the
Jnani, leaving him unaffected.
You may say that people find pain or pleasure in worldly phenomena.
It is owing to superimposition. This must not happen. With this end
in view practice is made.
Practice lies in one of the two courses: devotion or knowledge.
Even these are not the goals. Samadhi must be gained; it must be
continuously practised until sahaja samadhi results. Then there
remains nothing more to do.

Talk 466.
Mr. Vaidyalingam, an employee of the National Bank: By meditation
manifestation disappears and then ananda results. It is short-lived.
How is it made ever abiding?
M.: By scorching the predispositions.
D.: Is not the Self the witness only (sakshimatra)?
M.: ‘Witness’ is applicable when there is an object to be seen.
Then it is duality. The Truth lies beyond both. In the mantra,
sakshi cheta kevalo nirgunascha, the word sakshi must be
understood as sannidhi (presence), without which there could
be nothing. See how the sun is necessary for daily activities. He
does not however form part of the world actions; yet they cannot
take place without the sun. He is the witness of the activities.
So it is with the Self.

Talk 467.
7th March, 1938
Yogi Ramiah: All actions take place owing to Sakti. How far does
Sakti go? Can she effect anything without one’s own effort?
M.: The answer to the question depends on what the Purusha is
understood to be. Is he the ego or the Self?
D.: Purusha is svarupa.
M.: But he cannot make any prayatna (effort).
D.: Jiva is the one who makes the prayatna.
M.: So long as egoity lasts prayatna is necessary. When egoity ceases
to be, actions become spontaneous. The ego acts in the presence
of the Self. He cannot exist without the Self.
The Self makes the universe what it is by His Sakti, and yet He does
not Himself act. Sri Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita, “I am not
the doer and yet actions go on”. It is clear from the Mahabharata
that very wonderful actions were effected by Him. Yet He says that
He is not the doer. It is like the sun and the world actions.
D.: He is without abhimana (attachment) whereas the jiva is with
abhimana.

M.: Yes. Being attached, he acts and also reaps the fruits. If the fruits
are according to his desire he is happy; otherwise he is miserable.
Happiness and misery are due to his attachment. If actions were to take
place without attachment there would be no expectation of fruit.
D.: Can actions take place spontaneously without individual effort?
Should we not cook our food in order to eat it later?
M.: Atman acts through the ego. All actions are due to efforts only. A
sleeping child is fed by its mother. The child eats food without being
wide awake and then denies having taken food in sleep. However the
mother knows what happened. Similarly the Jnani acts unawares.
Others see him act, but he does not know it himself. Owing to fear
of Him wind blows, etc. That is the order of things. He ordains
everything and the universe acts accordingly, yet He does not
know. Therefore He is called the great Doer. Every embodied being
(ahankari) is bound by niyama. Even Brahma cannot transgress it.
[This devotee later explained the significance of his question. He
hears Sri Bhagavan say that the world goes on and the individual
needs are met by Divine Will. But he finds that Sri Bhagavan wakes
up the Asramites at about 4 a.m. to cut vegetables for the day’s
curry. He wanted to have the doubt cleared for his own benefit and
the question was not meant for discussion].

Talk 468.
10th March, 1938
As Sri Bhagavan was going out, the following Vedic chant was heard
from a hut:
Antaraditya manasa jvalantam - Brahmana vindat. Sri Bhagavan
drew our attention to it and remarked:-
In the Taittriya Upanishad also, He is said to be made of gold, etc.
What does it all mean? Although the sun and the other luminaries are
said to be self luminous, yet they do not shine forth of themselves
but they shine by the light of the Supreme Being. (na tatra
suryo....vibhati). So long as they are said to be separate from Brahman
their ‘Self-luminosity’ is the luminosity of Brahman. All these mantras
mentioning the sun, etc., speak only of Brahman.

Talk 469.
Yogi Ramiah asked: A master is approached by an aspirant for
enlightenment. The master says that Brahman has no qualities, nor
stain, nor movement, etc. Does he not then speak as an individual?
How can the aspirant’s ignorance be wiped off unless the master speaks
thus? Do the words of the master as an individual amount to Truth?
M.: To whom should the master speak? Whom does he instruct? Does
he see anyone different from the Self?
D.: But the disciple is asking the master for elucidation.
M.: True, but does the master see him as different? The ignorance of the
disciple lies in not knowing that all are Self-realised. Can anyone exist
apart from the Self? The master simply points out that the ignorance
lies there and therefore does not stand apart as an individual.
What is Realisation? Is it to see God with four hands, bearing
conch, wheel, club, etc.? Even if God should appear in that form,
how is the disciple’s ignorance wiped out? The truth must be eternal
realisation. The direct perception is ever-present Experience. God
Himself is known as directly perceived. It does not mean that He
appears before the devotee as said above. Unless the Realisation
be eternal it cannot serve any useful purpose. Can the appearance
with four hands be eternal realisation? It is phenomenal and illusory.
There must be a seer. The seer alone is real and eternal.
Let God appear as the light of a million suns: Is it pratyaksha?
To see it, the eyes, the mind, etc. are necessary. It is indirect knowledge,
whereas the seer is direct experience. The seer alone is pratyaksha.
All other perceptions are only secondary knowledge. The present
super-imposition of the body as ‘I’ is so deep-rooted, that the vision
before the eyes is considered pratyaksha but not the seer himself.
No one wants realisation because there is no one who is not realised.
Can anyone say that he is not already realised or that he is apart from
the Self? No. Evidently all are realised. What makes him unhappy is
the desire to exercise extraordinary powers. He knows that he cannot
do so. Therefore he wants God to appear before him, confer all His
powers on the devotee, and keep Himself in the background. In short,
God should abdicate His powers in favour of the man.

D.: It is all right for mahatmas like Sri Bhagavan to speak out so plainly.
Because the Truth does not swerve from you, you consider it easy for
all others. Nevertheless, the common folk have a real difficulty.
M.: Then does anyone say that he is not the Self?
D.: I meant to say that no one else has the courage to put things
straight like Maharshi.
M.: Where is the courage in saying things as they are?
Talk 470.
As a European Countess was leaving for Europe tonight she requested
him to bless her and her family.
M.: You do not go anywhere away from the Presence as you imagine.
The Presence is everywhere. The body moves from place to place;
yet it does not leave the one Presence. So no one can be out of sight
of the Supreme Presence. Since you identify one body with Sri
Bhagavan and another body with yourself, you find two separate
entities and speak of going away from here. Wherever you may
be, you cannot leave ME.
To illustrate it: The pictures move on the screen in a cinema show;
but does the screen itself move? No. The Presence is the screen:
you, I, and others are the pictures. The individuals may move but
not the Self.
Talk 471.
D.: The avatars are said to be more glorious than the self-realised
jnanis. Maya does not affect them from birth; divine powers are
manifest; new religions are started; and so on.
M.:
(1) “Jnani tvatmaiva me matam.”
(2) “Sarvam khalvidam brahma.”
How is an avatar different from a Jnani; or how can there be an
avatar as distinct from the universe?
D.: The eye (chakshu) is said to be the repository (ayatana) of all
forms; so the ear (srotra) is of all sounds, etc. The one Chaitanya
operates as all; no miracles are possible without the aid of the

senses (indriyas). How can there be miracles at all? If they are said
to surpass human understanding so are the creations in dreams.
Where then is the miracle?
The distinction between Avataras and Jnanis is absurd.
“Knower of Brahman becomes Brahman only” is otherwise
contradicted.
M.: Quite so.

Talk 472.
15th March, 1938
A large group of Punjabis arrived here in a pilgrim special. They
came to the Ramanasramam at about 8-45 a.m. and sat quiet for a
long time. At about 9-20 one of them said: “Your reputation has
spread in the Punjab. We have travelled a long distance to have your
darsan. Kindly tell us something by way of instruction.” There was
no oral reply. Sri Bhagavan smiled and gazed on. After some time the
visitor asked: “Which is the best - the yoga, the bhakti or the jnana
path?” Still Sri Bhagavan smiled and gazed as before.
Sri Bhagavan left the hall for a few minutes. The visitors began to
disperse. Still a sprinkling of them continued to sit in the hall. A long
standing disciple told the visitor that Sri Bhagavan had replied to his
questions by His Silence which was even more eloquent than words.
After Sri Bhagavan returned, the visitor began to speak a little. In the
course of his speech, he asked:
D.: It is all right for those who believe in God. Others ask - Is there
a God?
M.: Are you there?
D.: Quite so. That is the question. I see before my eyes a battalion of
sepoys passing. Therefore I am. The world must have been created
by God. How shall I see the Creator?
M.: See yourself, who sees these, and the problem is solved.
D.: Is it to sit silent or to read sacred books or to concentrate the mind?
Bhakti helps concentration. People fall at the feet of the bhakta. If
it does not happen he feels disappointed and his bhakti fades.

M.: The longing for happiness never fades. That is bhakti.
D.: How shall I get it quicker? Suppose I concentrate two hours today.
If I try to lengthen the period the next day, I fall asleep because I
get tired of the job.
M.: You do not get tired in sleep. The same person is now present
here. Why should you be tired now? Because your mind is restless
and wanders, it gets tired, and not you.
D.: I am a business man. How shall I get on with business and get
peace of mind also?
M.: This is also a thought. Give up this thought also and remain as
your true Self.
D.: It is said: Do your duty without any expectation of results. How
shall I get that frame of mind?
M.: You need not aspire for or get any new state. Get rid of your
present thoughts, that is all.
D.: How shall I get the bhakti necessary for it?
M.: It is bhakti to get rid of thoughts which are only alien to you (i.e.
the Self).
D.: What is thought-force, mesmerism, etc.? There was a doctor in
Paris called Dr. Coue. He was illiterate, but yet was able to cure
many incurable diseases by will-force. He used to say: Generate
power to cure yourself. The power is within you.
M.: It is through the same will-power that the seat of all diseases, the
body, has risen.
D.: So it is said thoughts manifest as objects.
M.: This thought must be for mukti (liberation).
D.: God must enable us to get rid of the other thoughts.
M.: This is again a thought. Let that which has incarnated raise the
question. You are not that because you are free from thoughts.
Another visitor from Rawalpindi asked: The Atman is formless. How
shall I concentrate on it?
M.: Leave alone the Atman which you say is formless or intangible.
Mind is tangible to you. Hold the mind and it will do.

D.: Mind itself is very subtle and is also the same as the Atman.
How shall we know the nature of the mind? You have said that all
supports are useless. What should be our stand then?
M.: Where does your mind stand?
D.: Where does it stand?
M.: Ask the mind itself.
D.: I ask you now. Should we concentrate on mind then?
M.: Um!
D.: But what is the nature of the mind? It is formless. The problem
is perplexing.
M.: Why are you perplexed?
D.: The sastras want us to concentrate and I cannot do so.
M.: Through what sastras have we known our existence?
D.: It is a matter of experience. But I want to concentrate.
M.: Be free from thoughts. Do not hold on to anything. They do not
hold you. Be yourself.
D.: I do not yet understand as to where I take my stand and concentrate.
Can I meditate on my mind?
M.: Whose mind?
D.: My own mind?
M.: Who are you? The question now resolves itself all right.
(All retired for lunch. The visitor returned at 2-30 p.m. and pursued
the same question.)
He said: Maharshi advises the seeker to get rid of thoughts. On what
should I concentrate the mind after all the thoughts are expelled? I
do not see where I stand then and on what I should concentrate.
M.: For whom is the concentration?
D.: For the mind.
M.: Then concentrate the mind.
D.: On what?
M.: Answer the question yourself. What is the mind? Why should
you concentrate?

D.: I do not know what the mind is. I ask Maharshi.
M.: Maharshi does not seek to know the mind. The questioner must
question the mind itself as to what it is.
D.: Maharshi advises that the mind should be divested of thoughts.
M.: This is itself a thought.
D.: When all thoughts disappear what remains over?
M.: Is the mind different from thoughts?
D.: No. The mind is made up of thoughts. My point is this: When all
thoughts are got rid of, how shall I concentrate the mind?
M.: Is not this also a thought?
D.: Yes, but I am advised to concentrate.
M.: Why should you concentrate? Why should you not allow your
thoughts free play?
D.: The sastras say that the thoughts, thus playing free, lead us astray,
that is, to unreal and changeful things.
M.: So then, you want not to be led to unreal and changeful things. Your
thoughts are unreal and changeful. You want to hold the Reality. That
is exactly what I say. The thoughts are unreal. Get rid of them.
D.: I understand now. Yet there is a doubt. “Not a trice can you remain
inactive.” How shall I be able to rid myself of thoughts?
M.: The same Gita says: “Although all actions take place, I am not the doer.”
It is like the sun towards the world activities. The Self always remains
actionless, whereas thoughts arise and subside. The Self is Perfection; it
is immutable; the mind is limited and changeful. You need only to cast
off your limitations. Your perfection thus stands revealed.
D.: Grace is necessary for it.
M.: Grace is ever present. All that is necessary is that you surrender to It.
D.: I surrender and pray that even if I go wrong I may be forcibly
drawn to it.
M.: Is this surrender? Surrender to be complete must be
unquestioning.
D.: Yes, I surrender. You say I must dive into the ocean of the Self
like a pearl-diver into the sea.

M.: Because you are now thinking that you are out of the ocean of
Consciousness.
D.: I practise pranayama. It generates heat in the body. What should
I do?
M.: The heat will pass away when the mind gains calm
D.: That is true but most difficult.
M.: This is again a thought which is an obstacle.
Talk 473.
Someone remarked: It is said that they get mukti unasked who live or
die within a radius of 30 miles round Arunachala. It is also admitted
that only by jnana is liberation obtained. The purana also remarks
that Vedanta Vijnana is difficult to get. So mukti is difficult. But life or
death round about the Hill bestows mukti so easily. How can it be?
M.: Siva says, “By My command.” Those who live here need no initiation,
diksha, etc., but get mukti.. Such is the command of Siva.
D.: The purana also says that those who are born here are Siva’s group
of followers, such as ghosts, spirits, disembodied beings, etc.
M.: So it is said of other kshetras as well, e.g., Tiruvarur, Chidambaram.
D.: How does mere life or death here confer mukti? It is difficult to
understand.
M.: Darsanad Abhrasadasi jananat Kamalalaye, Kasyantu maranam
muktih smaranad Arunachale.
“To see Chidambaram, to be born in Tiruvarur, to die in Benares,
or merely to think of Arunachala, is to be assured of Liberation.”
Jananat Kamalalaye means “by being born in Kamalalaya”. What
is it? It is the Heart.
Similarly, Abhrasadasi - Seat of Consciousness. Again, Kasi is
the Light of Realisation. Remembering Arunachala completes the
verse. It must also be understood in the same sense.
D.: So bhakti is necessary.
M.: Everything depends on the outlook. One sees that all born in
Tiruvarur, or visiting Chidambaram, or dying in Banares, or
contemplating Arunachala, are muktas.

D.: I think of Arunachala, but still I am not a mukta.
M.: Change of outlook is all that is necessary. See what such a change
did for Arjuna. He had the vision, of the Cosmic Self. Sri Krishna
says: “Gods and saints are eager to see my Cosmic Form. I have
not fulfilled their desire. Yet I endow divine sight by which you can
see that Form.” Well, having said so, does He show what He is?
No. He asks Arjuna to see in Him all that he desires to see. If that
were His real form it must be changeless and known for what it is
worth. Instead, Arjuna is commanded to see whatever he desires.
So where is the Cosmic Form? It must be in Arjuna.
Furthermore, Arjuna finds Gods and saints in that form and they
are praising the Lord. If the form be withheld from the Gods and
saints as said by Krishna, who are they of Arjuna’s vision?
D.: They must be in his imagination.
M.: They are there because of Arjuna’s outlook.
D.: Then the outlook must be changed by God’s Grace.
M.: Yes. That happens to bhaktas.
D.: A man dreams of a tiger, takes fright and wakes up. The dream-tiger
appears to the dream ego who is also frightened. When he
wakes up how is it that that ego disappears, and the man wakes up
as the waking ego?
M.: That establishes that the ego is the same. Dream, wakefulness
and sleep are passing phases for the same ego.
D.: It is so difficult to spot the mind. The same difficulty is shared
by all.
M.: You can never find the mind through mind. Pass beyond it in order
to find it non-existent.
D.: Then one must directly go to seek the ego. Is it so?
M.: That’s it.
Mind, ego, intellect are all different names for one single inner
organ (antahkarana). The mind is only the aggregate of thoughts.
Thoughts cannot exist but for the ego. So all thoughts are pervaded
by ego (aham). Seek wherefrom the ‘I’ rises and the other thoughts
will disappear.

D.: What remains over cannot be ‘I’, but Pure Consciousness.
M.: Quite so. You start seeking happiness. On analysis you find
that misery is caused by thoughts. They are called the mind.
While trying to control the mind you seek the ‘I’ and get fixed
in Being-Knowledge-Bliss.
Another devotee: What then is the mind?
M.: Mind is consciousness which has put on limitations. You are
originally unlimited and perfect. Later you take on limitations and
become the mind.
D.: It is avarana (veiling) then. How does this happen?
M.: To whom is the avarana? It is the same as avidya (ignorance),
ego or the mind.
D.: Avarana means obscuration. Who is obscured? How does it arise?
M.: The limitation is itself obscuration. No questions will arise if
limitations are transcended.

Talk 474.
16th March, 1938
There was some reference to the heart. Sri Bhagavan said: The yoga
sastras speak of 72,000 nadis, of 101 nadis, etc. A reconciliation is
effected by others that 101 are the main nadis, which subdivide into
72,000. These nadis are supposed by some to spread out from the
brain, by others from the Heart and by some others from the coccyx.
They speak of a paranadi which is said to rise up from the coccyx
through the Sushumna to the brain and descends to the heart. Others
say that the Sushumna ends in Para.
A few advise seeking realisation in the head (Sahasrara); a few between
the eyebrows; a few in the heart; others in the solar plexus. If realisation
amounts to gaining the Paranadi, one might enter it from the Heart. But
the yogi is engaged in cleansing the nadis; then Kundalini is awakened
which is said to rise up from the coccyx to the head. The yogi is later
advised to come down to the Heart as the final step.
The Vedas say: “The Heart is like a lotus turned down, or a plantain
bud.”

“There is a bright spot atom-like, like the end of a grain of paddy.”
“That spot is like a flame and in its centre, transcendental Brahman
is seated.” Which is that Heart? Is it the heart of the physiologists?
If so, the physiologists know best.
The Heart of the Upanishads is construed as Hridayam, meaning:
This (is) the centre. That is, it is where the mind rises and subsides.
That is the seat of Realisation. When I say that it is the Self the people
imagine that it is within the body. When I ask where the Self remains
in one’s sleep they seem to think that it is within the body, but unaware
of the body and its surroundings like a man confined in a dark room.
To such people it is necessary to say that the seat of Realisation is
somewhere within the body. The name of the centre is the Heart; but
it is confounded with the heart organ.
When a man dreams, he creates himself (i.e., the ahamkar, the seer)
and the surroundings. All of them are later withdrawn into himself.
The one became many, along with the seer. Similarly also, the one
becomes many in the waking state. The objective world is really
subjective. An astronomer discovers a new star at immeasurable
distance and announces that its light takes thousands of light years to
reach the earth. Well, where is the star in fact? Is it not in the observer?
But people wonder how a huge globe, larger than the Sun, at such a
distance can be contained in the brain-cells of a man. The space, the
magnitudes and the paradox are all in the mind only. How do they
exist there? Inasmuch as you become aware of them, you must admit
a light which illumines them. These thoughts are absent in sleep but
rise up on waking. So this light is transient, having an origin and an
end. The consciousness of ‘I’ is permanent and continuous. So this
cannot be the aforesaid light. It is different but has no independent
existence. Therefore it must be abhasa (reflected light). The light in
the brain is thus reflected knowledge (abhasa samvit) or reflected
being (abhasa sat). The true knowledge (Samvit) or Being (Sat) is in
the centre called Heart (Hridaya). When one wakes up from sleep it
is reflected in the head, and so the head is no longer lying prone but
rises up. From there the consciousness spreads all over the body and
so the superimposed ‘I’ functions as the wakeful entity.

The pure light in the brain is suddha manas (the pure mind) which later
becomes contaminated and is malina manas, the one ordinarily found.
All these are however contained in the Self. The body and its
counterparts are in the Self. The Self is not confined in the body, as
is commonly supposed.

Talk 475.
16th March, 1938
Sri Maharshi read out a news item from a paper to the following effect:
A forest guard armed with a rifle was going in the jungle and noticed two
bright spots in a thicket. On closer approach to find out what they were,
he was face to face with a huge tiger within a few yards of him. He threw
down his gun and assumed a prayerful attitude towards the jungle king.
The tiger stood up and slowly moved away without injuring him.

Talk 476.
21st March, 1938
Dr. Stanley Jones, a Christian missionary, visited Maharshi. He writes
books and delivers lectures. He has two Asramams under his control
in North India. He was accompanied by another gentleman and two
ladies. He is at present writing a book On the Indian Road and wants to
meet the spiritually great men in India so that he may collect material
for the book. He desired to know how the Indian sages have proceeded
and what they have found as their experience in divinity. So he asked
questions. (This is only a short sketch of his interview).
D.: What is your quest? What is the goal? How far have you
progressed?
M.: The goal is the same for all. But tell me why you should be in search
of a goal? Why are you not content with the present condition?
D.: Is there then no goal?
M.: Not so. What makes you seek a goal? It is a counter-question to
be answered by you.
D.: I have my own ideas of these subjects. I want to know what
Maharshi has to say.

M.: Maharshi has no doubts to be cleared.
D.: Well, I consider the goal to be the realisation by the lower mind
of the higher mind so that the Kingdom of Heaven might endure
here on earth. The lower mind is incomplete and it must be made
perfect by realisation of the higher mind.
M.: So then you admit a lower mind which is incomplete and which seeks
realisation of the higher so that it may become perfect. Is that lower
mind apart from the higher mind? Is it independent of the other?
D.: The Kingdom of Heaven was brought down on Earth by Jesus
Christ. I consider Him to be the Kingdom personified. I want
everyone to realise the same. He said: “I am hungry with other
men’s hunger;” and so on. Mutual partnership in pleasure and
pain is the Kingdom of Heaven. If that Kingdom is universalised
everyone will feel at one with the rest.
M.: You speak of the differences between the lower and the higher
minds, pleasures and pains. What becomes of these differences in
your sleep?
D.: But I want to be wide awake.
M.: Is this your wide awakened state? It is not. It is only a dream in
your long sleep. All are in sleep, dreaming of the world and things
and actions.
D.: This is all Vedantic, I have no use for it. The existing differences
are not imaginary. They are positive. However, what is that real
waking? Can Maharshi tell us what he has found it to be?
M.: Real waking lies beyond the three states of waking, dream and
sleep.
D.: I am really awake and know that I am not in sleep.
M.: Real waking lies beyond the plane of differences.
D.: What is the state of the world then?
M.: Does the world come and tell you “I exist”?
D.: No. But the people in the world tell me that the world needs
spiritual, social and moral regeneration.
M.: You see the world and the people in it. They are your thoughts.
Can the world be apart from you?

D.: I enter into it with love.
M.: Before entering thus do you stand aloof?
D.: I am identified with it and yet remaining apart. Now I came here
to ask Maharshi and hear him. Why does he ask me questions?
M.: Maharshi has replied. His reply amounts to this: Real waking
does not involve differences.
D.: Can such realisation be universalised?
M.: Where are differences there? There are no individuals in it.
D.: Have you reached the goal?
M.: The goal cannot be anything apart from the Self nor can it be
something to be gained afresh. If that were so, such goal cannot
be abiding and permanent. What appears anew will also disappear.
The goal must be eternal and within. Find it within yourself.
D.: I want to know your experience.
M.: Maharshi does not seek enlightenment. The question is of no
use to the questioner. Whether I have realised or not, how does it
affect the questioner?
D.: Not so. Each one’s experience has a human value in it and can
be shared by others.
M.: The problem must be solved by the questioner himself. The
question is best directed to oneself.
D.: I know the answer to the question.
M.: Let us have it.
D.: I was shown the Kingdom of Heaven twenty years ago. It was
by God’s grace only. I made no effort for it. I was happy. I want to
universalise, moralise and socialise it. At the same time I want to
know Maharshi’s experience of the Divine.
Mrs. Jinarajadasa intervened and spoke softly: We all agree that
Maharshi has brought the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth. Why do
you press him to answer your questions relating to his realisation?
It is for you to seek and gain it.
The questioner listened to her, argued slightly and resumed his questions
to Maharshi. After one or two light questions, Major Chadwick spoke
sternly: “The Kingdom of Heaven is within you,” says the Bible.

D.: How shall I realise it?
Major Chadwick: Why do you ask Maharshi to realise it for you?
D.: I do not.
Major Chadwick: The Kingdom is within you. You should realise it.
D.: It is within only for those who hear it.
Major Chadwick: The Bible says within you, and adds no qualifications.
The questioner felt his conversation was already too long and so
retired after thanking Maharshi and others.
Talk 477.
Mrs. Jinarajadasa: How shall we be able to remember the truth
experienced in dreams?
M.: Your present waking state, your dreams and your desire to
remember are all thoughts. They arise only after the mind has
arisen. Were you not existing in the absence of the mind?
D.: Yes, I was.
M.: The fact of your existence is also your realisation
D.: I understand it intellectually. The truth is felt in temporary flashes
only. It is not abiding.
M.: Such thoughts smother up the state of your eternal realisation.
D.: The rough and tumble of town life is not congenial to realisation.
Jungle retreats afford the necessary quiet and solitude.
M.: One can be free in a town and may yet be bound in jungle retreats.
It is all in the mind.
D.: The mind again is maya, I suppose.
M.: What is maya? The knowledge that the mind is divorced from the
Reality is maya. The mind is in Reality only and not apart. This
knowledge is the elimination of maya.
Further conversation led to the question if the mind was identical with
the brain. Sri Bhagavan said: The mind is only a force operating on the
brain. You are now here and awake. The thoughts of the world and the
surroundings are in the brain within the body. When you dream you create
another self who sees the world of dream creation and the surroundings
just as you do now. The dream visions are in the dream brain which is
again in the dream body. That is different from your present body. You

remember the dream now. The brains are however different. Yet the
visions appear in the mind. The mind therefore is not identical with the
brain. Waking, dream and sleep are for the mind only.
D.: The understanding is intellectual.
M.: Intellect. Whose intellect? The problem revolves round that
question.
You admit that you exist even in the absence of intellect - say, in
sleep. How do you know that you exist if you have not realised your
existence? Your very existence is realisation. You cannot imagine a
point of time when you do not exist. So there is no period of time
when realisation is not.

Talk 478.
22nd March, 1938
A certain man from Madurai asked: How to know the Power of God?
M.: You say ‘I AM’. That is it. What else can say I AM?
One’s own being is His Power. The trouble arises only when one
says, “I am this or that, such and such.” Do not do it - Be yourself.
That is all.
D.: How to experience Bliss?
M.: To be free from thinking “I am now out of Bliss”.
D.: That is to say free from modes of mind.
M.: To be with only one mode of mind to the exclusion of others.
D.: But Bliss must be experienced.
M.: Bliss consists in not forgetting your being. How can you be
otherwise than what you really are? It is also to be the Seat of
Love. Love is Bliss. Here the Seat is not different from Love.
D.: How shall I be all-pervading?
M.: Give up the thought, “I am not all-pervading now.”
D.: How to permeate the separate objects?
M.: Do they exist independently of “I”? Do they say to you “We are”? You
see them. You are, and then the objects are also seen. “Without me, these
do not exist” - this knowledge is permeation. Owing to the idea “I am

the body; there is something in me” the separate objects are seen as if
lying outside. Know that they are all within yourself. Is a piece of cloth
independent of yarn? Can the objects remain without Me?
Talk 479.
D.: Which is the best of all the religions? What is Sri Bhagavan’s
method?
M.: All religions and methods are one and the same.
D.: Different methods are taught for liberation.
M.: Why should you be liberated? Why not remain as you are now?
D.: I want to get rid of pain. To be rid of it is said to be liberation.
M.: That is what all religions teach.
D.: But what is the method?
M.: To retrace your way back.
D.: Whence have I come?
M.: That is just what you should know. Did these questions arise in your
sleep? Did you not exist then? Are you not the same being now?
D.: Yes, I was in sleep; so also the mind; but the senses had merged,
so I could not speak.
M.: Are you jiva? Are you the mind? Did the mind announce itself
to you in sleep?
D.: No. But elders say that the jiva is different from Isvara.
M.: Leave Isvara alone. Speak for yourself.
D.: What about myself? Who am I?
M.: That is just it. Know it, when all will be known; if not, ask then.
D.: On waking I see the world and I am not changed from sleep.
M.: But this is not known in sleep. Now or then, the same you remain.
Who has changed now? Is your nature to be changing or remain
unchanging?
D.: What is the proof?
M.: Does one’s own being require a proof? Only remain aware of
your own self, all else will be known.
D.: Why then do the dualists and non-dualists quarrel among
themselves?
M.: If each one minds his own business, there will be no quarrel.

Talk 480.
A European lady, Mrs. Gasque, gave a slip of paper on which was written:
We are thankful to Nature and the Infinite Intelligence for your
Presence among us. We appreciate that your Wisdom is founded
upon pure Truth and the basic principle of Life and Eternity. We are
happy that you remind us to “Be still and Know THAT”.
What do you consider the future of this Earth?
Answer: The answer to this question is contained in the other sheet.
Be still and know that I AM GOD.
“Stillness” here means “Being free from thoughts”.
D.: This does not answer the question. The planet has a future - what
is it to be?
M.: Time and space are functions of thoughts. If thoughts do not arise
there will be no future or the Earth.
D.: Time and space will remain even if we do not think of them.
M.: Do they come and tell you that they are? Do you feel them in
your sleep?
D.: I was not conscious in my sleep.
M.: And yet you were existing in your sleep.
D.: I was not in my body. I had gone out somewhere and jumped in
here just before waking up.
M.: Your having been away in sleep and jumping in now are mere
ideas. Where were you in sleep? You were only what you are, but
with this difference that you were free from thoughts in sleep.
D.: Wars are going on in the world. If we do not think, do the wars cease?
M.: Can you stop the wars? He who made the world will take care of it.
D.: God made the world and He is not responsible for the present condition
of the world. It is we who are responsible for the present state.
M.: Can you stop the wars or reform the world?
D.: No.
M.: Then why do you worry yourself about what is not possible for
you? Take care of yourself and the world will take care of itself.
D.: We are pacifists. We want to bring about Peace.

M.: Peace is always present. Get rid of the disturbances to Peace.
This Peace is the Self.
The thoughts are the disturbances. When free from them, you are
Infinite Intelligence, i.e., the Self. There is Perfection and Peace.
D.: The world must have a future.
M.: Do you know what it is in the present? The world and all together
are the same, now as well as in the future.
D.: The world was made by the operation of Intelligence on ether
and atoms.
M.: All of them are reduced to Isvara and Sakti. You are not now apart
from Them. They and you are one and the same Intelligence.
After a few minutes one lady asked: “Do you ever intend to go to
America?”
M.: America is just where India is (i.e., in the plane of thought).
Another (Spanish) lady: They say that there is a shrine in the
Himalayas entering which one gets some strange vibrations which
heal all diseases. Is it possible?
M.: They speak of some shrine in Nepal and also in other parts of
the Himalayas where the people are said to become unconscious
on entering them.
Talk 481.
Muruganar asked what prajnana is.
M.: Prajnana (Absolute Knowledge) is that from which vijnana
(relative knowledge) proceeds.
D.: In the state of vijnana one becomes aware of the samvit (cosmic
intelligence). But is that suddha samvit aware by itself without the
aid of antahkaranas (inner organs)?
M.: It is so, even logically.
D.: Becoming aware of samvit in jagrat by vijnana, prajnana is not
found self-shining. If so, it must be found in sleep.
M.: The awareness is at present through antahkaranas. Prajnana is
always shining even in sleep. If one is continuously aware in jagrat
the awareness will continue in sleep also.

Moreover, it is illustrated thus: A king comes into the hall, sits there
and then leaves the place.
He did not go into the kitchen. Can one in the kitchen for that reason
say, “The king did not come here”? When awareness is found in
jagrat it must also be in sleep.

Talk 482.
29th April, 1938
Dr. Pande of Indore is on a visit here. He asked leave of Bhagavan to
ask questions so that his doubts might be cleared. He wanted to be
shown a practical way to realise the Self.
M.: A man was blindfolded and left in the woods. He then enquired
of the way to Gandhara from each one he met on the way until
he finally reached it. So also all the ways lead to Self-Realisation.
They are aids to the common goal.
D.: Dhyana will be easy if there is a pratikam (symbol). But the
enquiry into the Self does not show any pratikam.
M.: You admit the existence of the Self. Do you point to the pratikam
(symbol) and say that it is the Self? Maybe you think the body is the
Self. But consider your deep sleep. You do exist then. What is the
pratikam there? So the Self can be realised without pratikam.
D.: Quite true. I see the force of the words. But yet are not mantras,
etc., helpful?
M.: They are helpful. What is mantra? You are thinking of the simple
sounds of the mantra. Repetition of the same excludes all other
thoughts. The single thought of the mantra japa remains. That too
drops away giving place to the Infinite Self, which is the mantra
itself.
Mantra, dhyana, bhakti, etc., are all aids and finally lead to
Swarupa, the Self, which is they themselves.
After a few minutes Maharshi continued:
Everyone is the Self, indeed infinite. Yet each one mistakes the
body for the Self. To know anything, illumination is necessary.
Such illuminating agency can only be in the form of light which is

however lighting the physical light and darkness. So then that other
Light lies beyond the apparent light and darkness. It is itself neither
light nor darkness but is said to be Light because It illumines both.
It is also Infinite and remains as Consciousness. Consciousness is
the Self of which everyone is aware. No one is away from the Self.
So each one is Self-realised. Yet what a mystery that no one knows
this fundamental fact, and desires to realise the Self?
This ignorance is due to the mistaking of the body for the Self.
Realisation now consists in getting rid of this false idea that one
is not realised. Realisation is not anything newly got. It must
be already there in order that it may be permanent. Otherwise
Realisation is not worth attempting.
After the false notion ‘I-am-the-body’ or ‘I have not realised’
is removed, Supreme Consciousness or the Self alone is left
over, which is however called Realisation in the present state of
knowledge. However, the truth is that Realisation is eternal and
already there, here and now.
Finally, Realisation amounts to elimination of ignorance and
nothing more or less.
D.: My profession requires my stay in my place. I cannot remain in
the vicinity of sadhus. Can I have realisation even in the absence
of sat sanga as necessitated by my circumstances?
M.: Sat is aham pratyaya saram = the Self of selves. The sadhu is that
Self of selves. He is immanent in all. Can anyone remain without
the Self? No. So no one is away from sat sanga.

Talk 483.
30th April, 1938
Mr. Sitaramiah, a visitor: What does samyamana mean in Patanjali
Yoga Sutra?
M.: One-pointedness of mind.
D.: By such samyamana in the Heart, chitta samvit is said to result.
What does it mean?
M.: Chitta samvit is Atma jnana i.e., Knowledge of the Self.

Talk 484.
D.: I think that celibacy and initiation are prerequisites even for a
householder in order that he may succeed in self-investigation. Am
I right? Or can a householder observe celibacy and seek initiation
from a master on occasions only?
M.: First ascertain who the wife and the husband are. Then these
questions will not arise.
D.: Engaged in other pursuits, can the mental activities be checked and the
query “Who am I?” pursued? Are they not contrary to each other?
M.: These questions arise only in the absence of strength of mind. As
the mental activities diminish its strength increases.
D.: Does the Karma theory mean that the world is the result of action
and reaction? If so, action and reaction of what?
M.: Until realisation there will be Karma, i.e., action and reaction;
after realisation there will be no Karma, no world.
Talk 485.
D.: While engaged in Atma vichara (the investigation of the Self), I
fall asleep. What is the remedy for it?
M.: Do nama-sankirtana (sing the name of God).
D.: It is ruled out in sleep.
M.: True. The practice should be continued while awake. Directly you
wake up from sleep, you must resume it. The sleeper does not care
for Atma vichara. So he need not practise anything. The waking
self desires it and so he must do it.
In the course of conversation Sri Bhagavan continued: The mind
is something mysterious. It consists of satva, rajas and tamas.
The latter two give rise to vikshepa. In the satva aspect, it remains
pure and uncontaminated. So there are no thoughts there and it is
identical with the Self. The mind is like akasa (ether). Just as there
are the objects in the akasa, so there are thoughts in the mind. The
akasa is the counterpart of the mind and objects are of thought.
One cannot hope to measure the universe and study the phenomena.
It is impossible. For the objects are mental creations. To measure
them is similar to trying to stamp with one’s foot on the head of

the shadow cast by oneself. The farther one moves the farther the
shadow does also. So one cannot plant one’s foot on the head of
the shadow. (Here Sri Bhagavan related several incidents connected
with shadows including the pranks of monkeys and a mirror). A
child sees his own shadow and tries to hold the head of the shadow.
As he bends and puts out his arm the head moves further. The child
struggles more and more. The mother, seeing the struggle, pities
the young one. So she takes hold of the young hand and keeps it on
his own head and tells the child to observe the head of the shadow
caught in the hand. Similarly with the ignorant practiser to study
the universe. The universe is only an object created by the mind
and has its being in the mind. It cannot be measured as an exterior
entity. One must reach the Self in order to reach the universe.
Again people often ask how the mind is controlled. I say to them,
“Show me the mind and then you will know what to do.” The fact is
that the mind is only a bundle of thoughts. How can you extinguish it
by the thought of doing so or by a desire? Your thoughts and desires
are part and parcel of the mind. The mind is simply fattened by new
thoughts rising up. Therefore it is foolish to attempt to kill the mind by
means of the mind. The only way of doing it is to find its source and
hold on to it. The mind will then fade away of its own accord. Yoga
teaches chitta vritti nirodha (control of the activities of the mind).
But I say Atma vichara (Self-investigation). This is the practical way.
Chitta vritti nirodha is brought about in sleep, swoon or by starvation.
As soon as the cause is withdrawn there is recrudescence of thoughts.
Of what use is it then? In the state of stupor there is peace and no
misery. But misery recurs when the stupor is removed. So nirodha
(control) is useless and cannot be of lasting benefit.
How then can the benefit be made lasting? It is by finding the cause
of misery. Misery is due to objects. If they are not there, there will be
no contingent thoughts and so misery is wiped off. “How will objects
cease to be?” is the next question. The shrutis and the sages say
that the objects are only mental creations. They have no substantive
being. Investigate the matter and ascertain the truth of the statement.
The result will be the conclusion that the objective world is in the
subjective consciousness. The Self is thus the only Reality which
permeates and also envelops the world. Since there is no duality, no

thoughts will arise to disturb your peace. This is Realisation of the
Self. The Self is eternal and so also its Realisation.
In the course of the discourse Sri Bhagavan also made a few points
clearer:
Abhyasa consists in withdrawal within the Self every time you are
disturbed by thought. It is not concentration or destruction of the
mind but withdrawal into the Self.
Dhyana, bhakti, japa, etc., are aids to keep out the multiplicity of
thoughts. A single thought prevails which too eventually dissolves
in the Self.
The questioner quoted that the mind starved of ideas amounted to
realisation and asked what the experience is in that state. He himself
read out a passage from Mr. Brunton that it was indescribable.
The answer was there. He again ventured out that it must be like
looking through an unsilvered mirror, as contrasted with the present
experience corresponding to looking on a silvered mirror.
Sri Bhagavan said it was a mirror facing another clear mirror, i.e.,
no reflection.

Talk 486.
2nd May, 1938
Mr. Ganapatram: How shall I find out “Who am I”?
M.: Are there two selves for the one self to find the other?
D.: The Self must be only one consisting of two aspects of ‘I’ and
sankalpa (i.e., of thinker and thought).
After a time he continued: Please say how I shall realise the ‘I’. Am
I to make the japa, “Who am I?”
M.: No japa of the kind is meant.
D.: Am I to think “Who am I”?
M.: You have known that the ‘I-thought’ springs forth.
Hold the ‘I-thought’ and find its moola (source).
D.: May I know the way?
M.: Do as you have now been told and see.
D.: I do not understand what I should do.

M.: If it is anything objective the way can be shown objectively. This
is subjective.
D.: But I do not understand.
M.: What! Do you not understand that you are?
D.: Please tell me the way.
M.: Is it necessary to show the way in the interior of your own home?
This is within you.
D.: What do you advise me to do?
M.: Why should you do anything and what should you do? Only keep
quiet. Why not do so? Each one must do according to his own state.
D.: Please tell me what is suitable to me. I want to hear from you.
(No answer.)
Talk 487.
An English lady, a young woman, came here dressed in a Muslim sari.
She had evidently been in North India and met Dr. G. H. Mees.
Sri Bhagavan read out a stanza “The Black Sun” from the anniversary
number of The Vision, written by Swami Bharatananda.
After a few minutes, Miss J. asked: One gathers from the stanza that
one should keep on meditating until one gets merged in the state of
consciousness. Do you think it right?
M.: Yes.
D.: I go further and ask: Is it right that one should, by conscious will,
go into that state from which there is no return?
(No answer) - Dinner bell.

Afternoon
D.: What is the object of Self-Realisation?
M.: Self-Realisation is the final goal and it is the end in itself.
D.: l mean, what is the use of Self-Realisation?
M.: Why should you seek Self-Realisation? Why do you not rest content
with your present state? It is evident that you are discontented with
the present state. The discontent is at an end if you realise the Self.

D.: What is that Self-Realisation which removes the discontent? I am in the
world and there are wars in it. Can Self-Realisation put an end to it?
M.: Are you in the world? Or is the world in you?
D.: I do not understand. The world is certainly around me.
M.: You speak of the world and happenings in it. They are mere ideas
in you. The ideas are in the mind. The mind is within you. And so
the world is within you.
D.: I do not follow you. Even if I do not think of the world, the world
is still there.
M.: Do you mean to say that the world is apart from the mind and it
can exist in the absence of the mind?
D.: Yes.
M.: Does the world exist in your deep sleep?
D.: It does.
M.: Do you see it in your sleep?
D.: No, I don’t. But others, who are awake, see it.
M.: Are you so aware in your sleep? Or do you become aware of the
other’s knowledge now?
D.: In my waking state.
M.: So you speak of waking knowledge and not of sleep-experience. The
existence of the world in your waking and dream states is admitted
because they are the products of the mind. The mind is withdrawn in
sleep and the world is in the condition of a seed. It becomes manifest
over again when you wake up. The ego springs forth, identifies itself
with the body and sees the world. So the world is a mental creation.
D.: How can it be?
M.: Do you not create a world in your dream? The waking state also
is a long drawn out dream. There must be a seer behind the waking
and dream experiences. Who is that seer? Is it the body?
D.: It cannot be.
M.: Is it the mind?
D.: It must be so.
M.: But you remain in the absence of the mind.

D.: How?
M.: In deep sleep.
D.: l do not know if I am then.
M.: If you were not how do you recollect yesterday’s experiences? Is it
possible that there was a break in the continuity of the ‘I’ during sleep?
D.: It may be.
M.: If so, a Johnson may wake up as a Benson. How will the identity
of the individual be established?
D.: I don’t know.
M.: If this argument is not clear, follow a different line. You admit
“I slept well”, “I feel refreshed after a sound sleep”. So sleep was
your experience. The experiencer now identifies himself with the
‘I’ in the speaker. So this ‘I’ must have been in sleep also.
D.: Yes.
M.: So ‘I’ was in sleep, if the world was then there, did it say that it
existed?
D.: No. But the world tells me its existence now. Even if I deny its
existence, I may knock myself against a stone and hurt my foot.
The injury proves the existence of the stone and so of the world.
M.: Quite so. The stone hurts the foot. Does the foot say that there
is the stone?
D.: No. - ‘I’.
M.: Who is this ‘I’? It cannot be the body nor the mind as we have
seen before. This ‘I’ is the one who experiences the waking, dream
and sleep states. The three states are changes which do not affect
the individual. The experiences are like pictures passing on a screen
in the cinema. The appearance and disappearance of the pictures
do not affect the screen. So also, the three states alternate with one
another leaving the Self unaffected. The waking and the dream
states are creations of the mind. So the Self covers all. To know
that the Self remains happy in its perfection is Self-Realisation. Its
use lies in the realisation of Perfection and thus of Happiness.
D.: Can it be complete happiness to remain Self-realised if one does
not contribute to the happiness of the world? How can one be

so happy when there is a war in Spain, a war in China? Is it not
selfishness to remain Self-realised without helping the world?
M.: The Self was pointed out to you to cover the universe and also
transcend it. The world cannot remain apart from the Self. If the
realisation of such Self be called selfishness that selfishness must
cover the world also. It is nothing contemptible.
D.: Does not the realised man continue to live just like a non-realised
being?
M.: Yes, with this difference that the realised being does not see the
world as being apart from the Self, he possesses true knowledge and
the internal happiness of being perfect, whereas the other person
sees the world apart, feels imperfection and is miserable. Otherwise
their physical actions are similar.
D.: The realised being also knows that there are wars being waged
in the world, just like the other man.
M.: Yes.
D.: How then can he be happy?
M.: Is the cinema screen affected by a scene of fire burning or sea
rising? So it is with the Self.
The idea that I am the body or the mind is so deep that one cannot get
over it even if convinced otherwise. One experiences a dream and knows
it to be unreal on waking. Waking experience is unreal in other states.
So each state contradicts the others. They are therefore mere changes
taking place in the seer, or phenomena appearing in the Self, which is
unbroken and remains unaffected by them. Just as the waking, dream
and sleep states are phenomena, so also birth, growth and death are
phenomena in the Self. which continues to be unbroken and unaffected.
Birth and death are only ideas. They pertain to the body or the mind. The
Self exists before the birth of this body and will remain after the death of
this body. So it is with the series of bodies taken up in succession. The
Self is immortal. The phenomena are changeful and appear mortal. The
fear of death is of the body. It is not true of the Self. Such fear is due to
ignorance. Realisation means True Knowledge of the Perfection and
Immortality of the Self. Mortality is only an idea and cause of misery.
You get rid of it by realising the Immortal nature of the Self.

3rd May, 1938
The same lady continued: If the world is only a dream, how should
it be harmonised with the Eternal Reality?
M.: The harmony consists in the realisation of its inseparateness
from the Self.
D.: But a dream is fleeting and unreal. It is also contradicted by the
waking state.
M.: The waking experiences are similar.
D.: One lives fifty years and finds a continuity in the waking
experience which is absent in dreams.
M.: You go to sleep and dream a dream in which the experiences of
fifty years are condensed within the short duration of the dream, say
five minutes. There is also a continuity in the dream. Which is real
now? Is the period covering fifty years of your waking state real or
the short duration of five minutes of your dream? The standards of
time differ in the two states. That is all. There is no other difference
between the experiences.
D.: The spirit remains unaffected by the passing phenomena and by
the successive bodies of repeated births. How does each body get
the life to set it acting?
M.: The spirit is differentiated from matter and is full of life. The
body is animated by it.
D.: The realised being is then the spirit and unaware of the world.
M.: He sees the world but not as separate from the Self.
D.: If the world is full of pain why should he continue the
world-idea?
M.: Does the realised being tell you that the world is full of pain? It is the
other one who feels the pain and seeks the help of the wise saying that
the world is painful. Then the wise one explains from his experience that
if one withdraws within the Self there is an end of pain. The pain is felt
so long as the object is different from oneself. But when the Self is found
to be an undivided whole who and what is there to feel? The realised
mind is the Holy Spirit and the other mind is the home of the devil. For
the realised being this is the Kingdom of Heaven. “The Kingdom of
Heaven is within you.” That Kingdom is here and now.

Talk 488.
A group of young men asked: “It is said that healthy mind can be only
in a healthy body. Should we not attempt to keep the body always
strong and healthy?”
M.: In that way there will be no end of attention to the health of the
body.
D.: The present experiences are the result of past Karma. If we know
the mistakes committed in the past, we can rectify them.
M.: If one mistake is rectified there yet remains the whole sanchita
which is going to give you innumerable births. So that is not the
procedure. The more you prune a plant, the more vigorously it
grows. The more you rectify your Karma, the more it accumulates.
Find the root of Karma and cut it off.

Talk 489.
4th May, 1938
Another group of visitors was asking the method of Realisation.
In the course of a reply Sri Bhagavan said: “Holding the mind and
investigating it is advised for a beginner. But what is mind after
all? It is a projection of the Self. See for whom it appears and from
where it rises. The ‘I-thought’ will be found to be the root-cause. Go
deeper; the ‘I-thought’ disappears and there is an infinitely expanded
‘I-consciousness’. That is otherwise called Hiranyagarbha. When it
puts on limitations it appears as individuals.”
Talk 490.
The English lady desired to have a private talk with Sri Bhagavan.
She began, “I am returning to England. I leave this place this
evening. I want to have the happiness of Self-Realisation in my
home. Of course it is not easy in the West. But I shall strive for it.
What is the way to do it?”
M.: If Realisation be something outside you a way can be shown
consistent with the safety of the individual, his capacity. etc. Then
the questions if it is realisable and, if so, in what time - will also
arise. But here, Realisation is of the Self. You cannot remain without

the Self. The Self is always realised. But only you do not recognise
the fact. The Realisation is now obscured by the present world-idea.
The world is now seen outside you and the idea associated
with it obscures your real nature. All that is needed is to overcome
this ignorance and then the Self stands revealed. No special effort
is necessary to realise the Self. All efforts are for eliminating the
present obscuration of the Truth.
A lady is wearing a necklace round her neck. She forgets it, imagines
it to be lost and impulsively looks for it here, there and everywhere.
Not finding it, she asks her friends if they have found it anywhere, until
one kind friend points to her neck and tells her to feel the necklace
round the neck. The seeker does so and feels happy that the necklace
is found. Again, when she meets her other friends, they ask her if her
lost necklace was found. She says ‘yes’ to them, as if it were lost and
later recovered. Her happiness on re-discovering it round her neck
is the same as if some lost property was recovered. In fact she never
lost it nor recovered it. And yet she was once miserable and now she
is happy. So also with the realisation of the Self. The Self is always
realised. The Realisation is now obscured. When the veil is removed
the person feels happy at rediscovering the ever-realised Self. The
ever-present Realisation appears to be a new Realisation.
Now, what should one do to overcome the present ignorance. Be
eager to have the true knowledge. As this eagerness grows the wrong
knowledge diminishes in strength until it finally disappears.
D.: The other day you were saying that there is no awareness in deep
sleep. But I have on rare occasions become aware of sleep even
in that state.
M.: Now, of these three factors, the awareness, sleep and knowledge
of it, the first one is changeless. That awareness, which cognised
sleep as a state, now sees the world also in the waking state. The
negation of the world is the state of sleep. The world may appear or
disappear - that is to say, one may be awake or asleep - the awareness
is unaffected. It is one continuous whole over which the three states
of waking, dream and sleep pass. Be that awareness even now. That
is the Self - that is Realisation - there is Peace - there is Happiness.
The lady thanked Maharshi and retired.

7th May. 1938
Talk 491.
Mr. Kishorelal Mashruwala, President, Gandhi Seva Sangh, asked:
“How is Brahmacharya to be practised in order that it may be
successfully lived up to?”
M.: It is a matter of will-power. Satvic food, prayers, etc., are useful
aids to it.
D.: Young men have fallen into bad habits. They desire to get over
them and seek our advice.
M.: Mental reform is needed.
D.: Can we prescribe any special food, exercise, etc., to them?
M.: There are some medicines. Yogic asanas and satvic food are
also useful.
D.: Some young persons have taken a vow of brahmacharya. They
repent of the vow after the lapse of ten or twelve years. Under
these circumstances should we encourage young persons to take
the vow of brahmacharya?
M.: This question will not arise in the case of true brahmacharya.
D.: Some young men take the vow of brahmacharya without knowing
its full implications. When they find it difficult to carry it out in
practice, they seek our advice.
M.: They need not take a vow but they may try it without the vow.
D.: Is naishthika brahmacharya (life-long celibacy) essential as a
sadhana for Self-Realisation?
M.: Realisation itself is naishthika brahmacharya. The vow is not
brahmacharya. Life in Brahman is brahmacharya and it is not a
forcible attempt at it.
D.: It is said that kama (desire), krodha (anger), etc.. vanish in the
presence of the Sadguru. Is it so?
M.: It is correct. Kama and krodha must vanish before SelfRealisation.
D.: But all the disciples of a guru are not of the same degree of
advancement. There are found lapses in a few cases. Who is
responsible for such lapses?

M.: There is no connection between Self-Realisation and individual
predispositions (samskara). It is not always possible to live up to
the ideal of the Guru.
D.: Do not passions affect Realisation?
M.: The attempt to cleanse oneself will be automatic.
D.: Is it not necessary to wash off all impurities before Realisation?
M.: Jnana will wash them clean.
D.: Gandhiji is often perplexed finding his intimate disciples going
wrong. He wonders how it could happen and thinks that it is due
to his own defects. Is it so?
M.: (Sri Bhagavan smiled and answered after a few minutes) Gandhiji
has struggled so long to perfect himself. All others will be right
in due course.
D.: Is the Hindu view of reincarnation correct?
M.: No definite answer is possible for this question. There are pros
and cons for the view. Even the present birth is denied natvevaham
jatu nasam etc., (Bhagavad Gita). We were never born, etc.
D.: Is not individuality anadi (without beginning)?
M.: Investigate and see if there is any individuality at all. Ask this
question after solving this problem.
Nammalvar says: “In ignorance I took the ego to be myself;
however, with right knowledge, the ego is nowhere and only you
remain as the SELF.”
Both monists and dualists are agreed on the necessity of Self-Realisation.
Let us do it first and then discuss the side-issues.
Advaita or dvaita cannot be decided on theoretical considerations
alone. If the Self is realised the question will not arise at all. Even
Suka had no confidence in his brahmacharya whereas Sri Krishna
was sure of his brahmacharya. Self-Realisation is designated by so
many different names, satya, brahmacharya, etc. What is natural
to the state of Self-Realisation forms the disciplinary course in
the other state. “I-am-the-body” idea will become extinct only on
Self-Realisation. With its extinction the vasanas become extinct
and all virtues will remain ever.

D.: Samskaras are said to persist even in a Jnani.
M.: Yes. They are bhoga hetu (leading to enjoyment only) and not
bandha hetu.
D.: This fact is often abused by fakes who pretend to be sadhus but lead
vicious lives. They say it is prarabdha (remnant of past Karma).
How shall we mark off the fakes from the genuine sadhus?
M.: The one who has given up the idea of being the doer cannot
repeat, “This is my prarabdha”. “The jnanis lead different lives”
is said for the benefit of others. The jnanis cannot make use of this
in explanation of their lives and conduct.
(After a few minutes, Sri Bhagavan remarked about Mr. Kishorelal’s
weak body).
Mr. Kishorelal: I am asthmatic. I have never been strong. Even as a
baby I was not fed on my mother’s milk.
M.: Here the mind is strong and the body is weak.
D.: I wanted to practise Raja Yoga. I could not do it because of
my physical unfitness. The mind also began to wander with the
movement of the body.
M.: If the mind be kept immovable let the body change as much as
it likes.
D.: Is it not a handicap to the beginner?
M.: Attempts must be made in spite of handicaps.
D.: Of course. But they will be momentary.
M.: The idea of ‘momentary’ is one among so many other ideas. So
long as thoughts persist this idea also will recur. Concentration is
our own nature (i.e. BE-ing). There is the effort now: but it ceases
after Self-Realisation.
D.: It is said to be the interval between flights of mind
M.: This too is due to the activity of the mind.
The Devotee submitted that whenever he had thought that he had found
something original, he later discovered that he was already forestalled.
Sri Bhagavan pointed out that everything remains already in the
germinal form and so there can be nothing new.

Talk 492.
8th May, 1938
In a suit by the temple against the Government regarding the ownership
of the Hill Sri Bhagavan was cited as a witness. He was examined by
a commission. In the course of the examination-in-chief Sri Bhagavan
said that Siva always remains in three forms: (1) as Parabrahman (2)
as Linga (here as the Hill) and (3) as Siddha. (Brahma Rupa; Linga
Rupa; Siddha Rupa).
There are some tirthas on the Hill, e.g., Mulaipal Tirtha and Pada
Tirtha, said to have been originated for or by Virupakshi Devar and
Guha Namassivayar. There is also Rshabha Tirtha. All of them are
in good condition.
Siva originally appeared as a column of Light. On being prayed to, the
Light disappeared into the Hill and manifested as Linga. Both are Siva.
Maharshi said: The buildings or asramams grow around me. I do not
wish for them. I do not ask for them nor prevent their formation. I
have known that actions are done even though I did not want them
to be done. So I conclude that they must happen and I therefore
do not say ‘no’.
Question: Is the present Sarvadhikari to be your successor?
M.: Yes. Only management.
(i.e., succession here means simple supervision).
Question: Is the work now being carried out by him?
M.: He simply supervises the work. The work is being done by others
as well.

Talk 493.
18th May, 1938
An Andhra visitor: What will aid me to fix my attention always at
Thy Holy Feet?
M.: The thought ‘Am I ever away from the feet?’
D.: How is this thought to be fixed?
M.: By driving away other thoughts which counteract this.

Talk 494.
Sri Bhagavan had gone through “Turn Eastwards” - the whole book
of Mademoiselle Pascaline Maillert - and spoke for about an hour
on that book. He said that the writing is full of feeling and the writer
is sincere. The book is written in simple style and finishes off with
remembrance of Himself. A few errors here and there might be pointed
out to be corrected in subsequent editions. Nandanar Charitra has
been repeated twice under the mistaken notion that the incident was
on two different occasions. Prithvi, Ap, etc., lingas are wrongly
located. Sri Bhagavan thinks the book well-written. He interprets
“Turn Eastwards” as “Turn to the Source of Light”. This book is a
good supplement to Mr. Brunton’s book.

Talk 495.
29th May, 1938
A Cochin Brahmin, Professor in the Ernakulam College, had an interesting
conversation with Sri Bhagavan. Sri Bhagavan advised surrender to God.
The visitor gave a glimpse of an ICS Officer. The gentleman while a
student was an atheist or an agnostic. He is very pious now and the change
has surprised everyone who had known him before.
In further conversation, the following points were noteworthy -
The visitor said: “One must become satiate with the fulfilment of
desires before they are renounced.” Sri Bhagavan smiled and cut
in: “Fire might as well be put out by pouring spirit over the flames.
(All laugh). The more the desires are fulfilled, the deeper grows the
samskara. They must become weaker before they cease to assert
themselves. That weakness is brought about by restraining oneself
and not by losing oneself in desires.
D.: How can they be rendered weaker?
M.: By knowledge. You know that you are not the mind. The desires
are in the mind. Such knowledge helps one to control them.
D.: But they are not controlled in our practical lives.
M.: Every time you attempt satisfaction of a desire the knowledge
comes that it is better to desist. Repeated reminders of this kind

will in due course weaken the desires. What is your true nature?
How can you ever forget it? Waking, dream and sleep are mere
phases of the mind. They are not of the Self. You are the witness
of these states. Your true nature is found in sleep.
D.: But we are advised not to fall into sleep during meditation.
M.: That is stupor you must guard against. That sleep which alternates
with waking is not true sleep. That waking which alternates with
sleep is not true waking. Are you now awake? You are not. You
are required to wake up to your real state. You should not fall into
false sleep nor keep falsely awake. Hence:
Laye sambodhayeccittam vikshiptam samayet punah.
What does it mean? It means that you should not fall into any one of
these states but remain amidst them in your true unsullied nature.
D.: The states are of our mind only.
M.: Whose mind? Hold it and see.
D.: The mind cannot be held. It is that which creates all these. It is
known only by its effects and not in its true nature.
M.: Quite so. You see the colours of the spectrum. Together they
form the white light. But seven colours are seen through the prism.
Similarly, the one Self resolves itself into so many phases, mind,
world, body, etc. The Self is seen as the mind, the body or the world.
That is to say, it becomes whatever you perceive it to be.
D.: These are difficult to follow in practice. I will hold on to God
and surrender.
M.: That is the best.
D.: How can I do my duties without attachment? There is my wife,
there are my children. I must do my duty towards them. Affection
is necessary. Am I right?
M.: How do you do your work in the College?
D.: (laughing) For wages.
M.: Not because you are attached, simply as doing your duty.
D.: But my pupils expect me to love them.
M.: “Detachment in the interior and attachment in appearance,” says
Yoga Vasishta.

Talk 496.
9th June, 1938
A Swami belonging to Sri Ramakrishna Mission had a very interesting
conversation with Sri Bhagavan in the course of which Sri Bhagavan
observed:
M.: Avidya (ignorance) is the obstacle for knowing your true nature
even at the present moment.
D.: How is one to get over Avidya?
M.: Ya na vidyate sa avidya (What is not, is avidya). So it is itself a myth.
If it really be, how can it perish? Its being is false and so it disappears.
D.: Although I understand it intellectually, I cannot realise the Self.
M.: Why should this thought disturb your present state of realisation.
D.: The Self is One, but yet I do not find myself free from the present
trouble.
M.: Who says this? Is it the Self which is only one? The question
contradicts itself.
D.: Grace is necessary for realisation.
M.: Inasmuch as you, being a man, now understand that there is a
higher power guiding you, it is due to Grace. Grace is within you.
Isvaro gururatmeti (Isvara, Guru and the Self are synonymous).
D.: I pray for that Grace.
M.: Yes, yes.

Talk 497.
10th June, 1938
In the course of a different conversation. Sri Bhagavan said:
Satva is the light,
Rajas is the subject, and
Tamas is the object.
Even the satva light is only reflected light. Were it pure, original Light,
there would be no modification in it. The manokasa (mind-ether) is
reflected as bhootakasa (element-ether) and objects are seen as being
separate from the subject.

Samadhi is present even in vyavaharadasa (practical life). Our
activities (vyavahara) have no existence apart from samadhi. The
screen is there when the pictures move past on it and also when they
are not projected. Similarly, the Self is always there in vyavahara
(activity) or in shanti (peace).
Talk 498.
People often say that a mukta purusha should go out and preach his
message to the people. They argue, how can anyone be a mukta so
long as there is misery by his side? True. But who is a mukta? Does
he see misery beside him? They want to determine the state of a
mukta without themselves realising the state. From the standpoint of
the mukta their contention amounts to this: a man dreams a dream
in which he finds several persons. On waking up, he asks, “Have the
dream individuals also wakened?” It is ridiculous.
Again, a good man says, “It does not matter even if I do not get mukti.
Or let me be the last man to get it so that I shall help all others to
be muktas before I am one.” It is all very good. Imagine a dreamer
saying, “May all these wake up before I do”. The dreamer is no more
absurd than the amiable philosopher aforesaid.
Talk 499.
The Swami of Sri Ramakrishna Mission had more questions to ask:
Swamiji, I went up the hill to see the asramas in which you lived in
your youth. I have also read your life. May I know if you did not then
feel that there is God to whom you should pray or that you should
practise something in order to reach this state?
M.: Read the life and you will understand. Jnana and ajnana are of
the same degree of truth; that is, both are imagined by the ignorant;
that is not true from the standpoint of the Jnani.
D.: Is a Jnani capable or likely to commit sins?
M.: An ajnani sees someone as a Jnani and identifies him with the
body. Because he does not know the Self and, mistakes his body
for the Self, he extends the same mistake to the state of the Jnani.
The Jnani is therefore considered to be the physical frame.

Again since the ajnani, though he is not the doer, yet imagines himself
to be the doer and considers the actions of the body his own, he thinks
the Jnani to be similarly acting when the body is active. But the
Jnani himself knows the Truth and is not confounded. The state of a
Jnani cannot be determined by the ajnani and therefore the question
troubles only the ajnani and never does it arise for the Jnani. If he is
a doer he must determine the nature of the actions. The Self cannot
be the doer. Find out who is the doer and the Self is revealed.
D.: There could be no advaita in actions. That is how the questions
arose.
M.: But the stanza says there should be. This ‘do’ is applicable only
to the practiser and not the accomplished ones.
D.: Yes. I quite see it. Moreover, advaita cannot be practised in one’s
dealings with the Guru. For, consistently with it, he cannot receive
instructions.
M.: Yes, the Guru is within and not without. A Tamil saint has said,
“O Guru! always abiding within me, but manifesting now in human
form only to guide and protect me!” What is within as the Self
manifests in due course as Guru in human shape.
D.: So it amounts to this. To see a Jnani is not to understand him.
You see the jnani’s body and not his jnanam. One must therefore
be a Jnani to know a Jnani.
M.: The Jnani sees no one as an ajnani. All are only jnanis in his sight.
In the ignorant state one superimposes his ignorance on a Jnani
and mistakes him for a doer. In the state of jnana, the Jnani sees
nothing separate from the Self. The Self is all shining and only pure
jnana. So there is no ajnana in his sight. There is an illustration
for this kind of allusion or super-imposition. Two friends went to
sleep side by side. One of them dreamt that both of them had gone
on a long journey and had strange experiences. On waking up he
recapitulated them and asked his friend if it was not so. The other
one simply ridiculed him saying that it was only his dream and
could not affect the other.
So it is with the ajnani who superimposes his illusive ideas on
others.

Regarding ajnana in early youth and jnana at the present time, Sri
Bhagavan said: There is no jnana as it is commonly understood.
The ordinary ideas of jnana and ajnana are only relative and false.
They are not real and therefore not abiding. The true state is the
non-dual Self. It is eternal and abides whether one is aware or not.
It is like kanthabharana or the tenth man.
D.: Someone else points it out.
M.: That one is not external. You mistake the body for the Guru. But
the Guru does not think himself so. He is the formless Self. That
is within you; he appears without only to guide you.
Talk 500.
D.: When all the thoughts are banished and the mind is still or enters
into a state of nothingness or emptiness, what is the nature of effort
needed on the part of the ‘seeker’ to have a pratyakshabhava of
the ‘sought’ (e.g., seeing a mango as a mango)?
M.: Who sees nothingness or emptiness? What is pratyaksha? Do you call
perception of mango pratyaksha? It involves the play of karma, karta,
and karya (action, doer and deed). So it is relative and not absolute.
Because you see a thing now you say there is nothing afterwards (i.e.,
when you no longer see it). Both are functions of the mind. What lies
behind both these assertions is pratyaksha. There is indriya pratyaksha
(directly perceived by senses), manasa pratyaksha (directly perceived
by the mind) and sakshat pratyaksha (realised as the very Being). The
last alone is true. The others are relative and untrue.
D.: If no effort is needed, can the perpetuated state of emptiness of
mind be called the state of realisation?
M.: Effort is needed so long as there is mind. The state of emptiness
has been the bone of contention in all philosophies.
D.: Is there anything like pratyakshabhava in the state of realisation
or is realisation merely felt or experienced as the very Being or
Sthiti of the soul?
M.: Pratyaksha is very being and it is not feeling, etc.
D.: Until the seeker realizes that he is the sought, the above questions
arise for him (the former).

M.: True. See if you are the seeker. The Self is often mistaken for the
knower. Is there not the Self in deep sleep, i.e., nescience? Therefore
the Self is beyond knower and knowledge. These doubts are in the
realm of mind. To speak from this point of view, the advice is to keep
the mind clear, and when rajas and tamas are wiped off, then the satva
mind alone exists. So the ‘I’ vanishes in the satva (oonadhal kan).
Jnana chakshus does not mean that it is an organ of perception
like the other sense-organs. Jnanameva chakshuh. Television, etc.,
are not functions of jnana chakshus. So long as there is a subject
and also an object it is only relative knowledge. Jnana lies beyond
relative knowledge. It is absolute.
The Self is the source of subject and object. Now ignorance
prevailing, the subject is taken to be the source. The subject is the
knower and forms one of the triads whose components cannot exist
independent of one another. So the subject or the knower cannot be
the ultimate Reality. Reality lies beyond subject and object. When
realised there will be no room for doubt.
“Bhidyate hridayagranthih
chhidyante sarvasamsayah.”
The heart knot is snapped; doubts are set at rest. That is called
pratyaksha and not what you are thinking of. Avidya nasa is alone
Self-Realisation. Self-Realisation is only owpacharika.
Self-Realisation is only a euphemism for elimination of ignorance.

Talk 501.
12th July, 1938
A young Mysorean asked:
D.: How did I get this body?
M.: You speak of ‘I’ and the ‘body’. There is the relationship between
the two. You are not therefore the body. The question does not occur
to the body because it is inert. There is an occasion when you are
not aware of the body - namely, in deep sleep. The question does
not arise then. Nevertheless you are there in sleep. To whom does
the question arise now?

D.: The ego.
M.: Yes. The body and the ego rise up together and sink together. There
is an occasion when you are not associated with the ego in deep sleep.
Now you are associated with the ego. Of these two states which is
your real state? You are present in sleep and the same “You” is present
now too. Why should the doubt arise now and not then? You are
right in saying that it is for the ego. You are not the ego. The ego is
intermediate between the Self and the body. You are the Self. Find
out the origin of the ego and see if the doubt persists.
Sri Bhagavan added after a few minutes: The answer, according to
sastras, will be that the body is due to karma. The question will be
how did karma arise? We must say “from a previous body” and so on
without end. The direct method of attack is not to depend on invisible
hypotheses but to ask “Whose Karma is it? Or whose body?” Hence
I answered in this manner. This is more purposeful.

Talk 502.
14th August, 1938
Sjt. Rajendra Prasad and Sjt. Jamnalal Bajaj with others are on a visit
to Sri Maharshi.
16th August - Sjt. J. B. asked questions:
D.: How is the mind to be steadily kept right?
M.: All living beings are aware of their surroundings and therefore
intellect must be surmised in all of them. At the same time, there is
a difference between the intellect of man and that of other animals,
because man not only sees the world as it is and acts accordingly,
but also seeks fulfilment of desires and is not satisfied with the
existing state of affairs. In his attempt to fulfil his desires he extends
his vision far and wide and yet he turns away dissatisfied. He now
begins to think and reason.
The desire for permanency of happiness and of peace bespeaks
such permanency in his own nature. Therefore he seeks to find and
regain his own nature, i.e., his Self. That found, all is found.
Such inward seeking is the path to be gained by man’s intellect. The
intellect itself realises after continuous practice that it is enabled by

some Higher Power to function. It cannot itself reach that Power.
So it ceases to function after a certain stage. When it thus ceases
to function the Supreme Power is still left there all alone. That is
Realisation; that is the finality; that is the goal.
It is thus plain that the purpose of the intellect is to realise its own
dependence upon the Higher Power and its inability to reach the
same. So it must annihilate itself before the goal is gained.
D.: A sloka is quoted which means: “I do not desire kingdoms, etc.
Only let me serve Thee for ever and there lies my highest pleasure.”
Is that right?
M.: Yes. There is room for kama (desire) so long as there is an object
apart from the subject (i.e., duality). There can be no desire if there
is no object. The state of no-desire is moksha. There is no duality
in sleep and also no desire. Whereas there is duality in the waking
state and desire also is there. Because of duality a desire arises for
the acquisition of the object. That is the outgoing mind, which is
the basis of duality and of desire. If one knows that Bliss is none
other than the Self the mind becomes inward turned. If the Self
is gained all the desires are fulfilled. That is the apta kamah atma
kamah akamascha (fulfilment of desire) of the Brihadaranyaka
Upanishad. That is moksha.
Here J. B. tried to make himself clear by saying that what he meant
by sadbuddhi was not the same as buddhi. It means that which holds
fast to the good, the right and the chosen path. He wanted to know
how such steadfastness could be gained.
M.: What is wanted for gaining the highest goal is loss of individuality.
The intellect is co-extensive with individuality. Loss of individuality
can only be after the disappearance of buddhi, good or bad. The
question therefore does not arise.
D.: But yet one must know the right thing, choose the right path,
practise the right dharma and hold fast to it. Otherwise he is lost.
M.: True strength accrues by keeping in the right direction without
swerving from it.
D.: Difficulties are met with. How is one to get the strength necessary
to overcome the obstacles which beset one’s path?

M.: By means of devotion and company of the sages.
D.: Loss of individuality was just before mentioned as a prerequisite
to moksha. Now devotion and association with the wise are advised
as the methods. Is there not individuality implied in them e.g., in
“I am a bhakta”, “I am a satsangi”?
M.: The method is pointed out to the seeker. The seeker has certainly
not lost his individuality so far. Otherwise the question would not
have arisen. The way is shown to effect the loss of individuality
of the seeker. It is thus appropriate.
D.: Is the desire for swaraj right?
M.: Such desire no doubt begins with self-interest. Yet practical work
for the goal gradually widens the outlook so that the individual
becomes merged in the country. Such merging of the individuality
is desirable and the related karma is nishkama (unselfish) .
D.: If swaraj is gained after a long struggle and terrible sacrifices, is
not the person justified in being pleased with the result and elated
by it?
M.: He must have in the course of his work surrendered himself to the
Higher Power whose Might must be kept in mind and never lost
sight of. How then can he be elated? He should not even care for the
result of his actions. Then alone the karma becomes unselfish.
D.: How can unerring rectitude be ensured for the worker?
M.: If he has surrendered himself to God or to Guru the Power to which
he had surrendered will take him on the right course. The worker
need no longer concern himself about the rectitude or otherwise of
the course. The doubt will arise only if he fails to obey the Master
in all details.
D.: Is there not any Power on earth which can bestow Grace on Its
devotees so that they may grow strong to work for the country and
gain swaraj? (Sri Maharshi remained silent. This, He later said,
signified that such was the case).
D.: Is not the tapasya of the ancient mahatmas of the land available
for the benefit of its present-day inheritors?
M.: It is, but the fact must not be overlooked that no one can claim to
be the sole beneficiary. The benefits are shared by all alike.

(After a pause) Is it without such saving Grace that the present
awakening has come into being? (Here Sri Bhagavan said that
before His arrival in Tiruvannamalai in 1896, there was not any
clear political thought in India. Only Dadabhai Nauroji had become
an M.P.).
After a short pause, J. B. said: Sri Rajendra Prasad is such a noble
and selfless worker for the country that he has sacrificed a very
lucrative career for this work. The country needs him. And yet he
is not in good health, and is always weak and ailing. Why should
there be such cruelty to such a noble son of the country?
(Sri Maharshi simply smiled a benign smile).

Talk 503.
17th August, 1938
An American gentleman, Mr. J. M. Lorey, has been staying in the
Asramam for about two months. He asked:
I am leaving tonight. It gives me pain to tear myself away from this
place. But I must go to America. I ask for a message from the Master.
The Master understands me even better than I do myself. So I pray
for a message to keep me up when I am away from the Master.
M.: The Master is not outside you as you seem to imagine. He is
within, is in fact the Self. Recognise this truth. Seek within you
and find Him there. Then you will have constant communion with
Him. The message is always there; it is never silent; it can never
forsake you: nor can you ever move away from the Master.
Your mind is outgoing. Because of that tendency it sees objects as
being outside and the Master among them. But the Truth is different.
The Master is the Self. Turn the mind within and you will find the
objects within. You will also realise that it is the Master who is
your very Self and there is nothing but Him.
Because you identify yourself with the body you have accepted
objects as being outside you. But are you the body? You are not.
You are the Self. There are all the objects and the whole universe.
Nothing can escape the Self. How then can you move away from
the Master who is your very Self? Suppose your body moves from

place to place; does it ever move away from your Self? Similarly,
you can never be without the Master.
Mr. Lorey was struck by the answer although he was already
familiar with the Master’s ways. He was even visibly moved. He
prayed that the Grace of the Master might abide with him.
Sri Bhagavan: The Master being the Self. Grace is inseparable from
the Self.
Mr. L. Saluted Sri Maharshi with intense fervour, saying: that he
might be enabled to realise the Truth.
M.: Is there any moment when you have not realised the Self? Can
you ever be apart from the Self? You are always That.
D.: You are the great Master shedding joy and bliss on the world. Your
love is indeed unlimited that you choose to abide in the world in
human shape! But I wish to know if one should necessarily realise
one’s Self before being of help to the country and a leader of men.
M.: Realise the Self first and the rest will follow.
D.: America is now the foremost country in industrial matters,
mechanical engineering, scientific advance and other worldly
affairs. Will she come up to the same level in spiritual life also?
M.: Certainly, she is bound to.
D.: Thank God that it will be so! I am a partner in an Engineering
firm. But it is not of vital concern to me. I try to bring spiritual
ideals into the work-a-day life of the firm.
M.: That is good. If you surrender yourself to the Higher Power all is
well. That Power sees your affairs through. Only so long as you think
that you are the worker you are obliged to reap the fruits of your
actions. If on the other hand, you surrender yourself and recognise
your individual self as only a tool of the Higher Power, that Power
will take over your affairs along with the fruits of actions. You are no
longer affected by them and the work goes on unhampered. Whether
you recognise the Power or not the scheme of things does not alter.
Only there is a change of outlook. Why should you bear your load on
the head when you are travelling on a train? It carries you and your
load whether the load is on your head or on the floor of the train.
You are not lessening the burden of the train by keeping it on your

head but only straining yourself unnecessarily. Similar is the sense of
doership in the world by the individuals.
D.: I have been interesting myself in metaphysics for over twenty
years. But I have not gained any novel experience as so many others
claim to do. I have no powers of clairvoyance, clairaudience, etc. I
feel myself locked up in this body and nothing more.
M.: It is right. Reality is only one and that is the self. All the rest are
mere Phenomena in it, of it and by it. The seer, the objects and
the sight, all are the self only. Can anyone see or hear, leaving the
self aside? What difference does it make to see or hear anyone in
close proximity or over enormous distance? The organs of sight and
hearing are needed in both cases; so also the mind is required. None
of them can be dispensed with in either case. There is dependence
one way or another. Why then should there be a glamour about
clairvoyance or clairaudience?
Moreover, what is acquired will also be lost in due course. They
can never be permanent.
The only permanent thing is Reality; and that is the Self. You
say “I am”, “I am going”, “I am speaking”, “I am working”, etc.
Hyphenate “I am” in all of them. Thus I - AM. That is the abiding
and fundamental Reality. This truth was taught by God to Moses:
“I AM that I-AM”. “Be still and know that I-AM God.” so “I-AM”
is God.
You know that you are. You cannot deny your existence at any
moment of time. For you must be there in order to deny it. This
(Pure Existence) is understood by stilling your mind. The mind
is the outgoing faculty of the individual. If that is turned within,
it becomes still in course of time and that “I-AM” alone prevails.
“I-AM” is the whole Truth.
D.: I appreciate the whole answer.
M.: Who is there to appreciate what?
A question about Heart. Sri Bhagavan said: Leave alone the idea
of right and left. They pertain to the body. The Heart is the Self.
Realise it and then you will see for yourself. (Mr. Lorey thanked
Sri Bhagavan and saluted him before retiring.)

Talk 504.
18th August, 1938
A visitor asked Sri Bhagavan about the ‘over-mind’, and ‘super-mind’,
the ‘Psychic’, the ‘Divine’ of Sri Aurobindo’s terminology.
M.: Realise the Self or the Divine. All these differences will disappear.
Talk 505.
Babu Rajendra Prasad said: I have come here with Mahatma Gandhiji’s
permission and I must return to him soon. Can Sri Bhagavan give me
any message for him?
M.: Adhyatma sakti is working within him and leading him on. That
is enough. What more is necessary?

Talk 506.
19th August, 1938
Explaining the opening stanza of Sad Vidya, Sri Bhagavan said: Sat
(Being) is Chit (Knowledge Absolute); also Chit is Sat; what is, is only
one. Otherwise the knowledge of the world and of one’s own being
will be impossible. It denotes both being and knowledge. However,
both of them are one and the same. On the other hand, be it Sat only
and not Chit also, such Sat will only be insentient (jada). In order
to know it another Chit will be needed; such Chit being other than
Sat cannot be. But it must be. Now taking Chit to be Sat, since Sat
is Jada, Chit also becomes jada which is absurd. Again to know it
another Chit is required, which is also absurd.
Therefore Sat and Chit are only one and the same.

Talk 507.
22nd August, 1938
An Arya Samajist from Bangalore with a companion visited Sri
Maharshi. He asked: What is the use of yoga-practice? Is it for
personal use or universal benefit?
M.: Yoga means union of two entities. What are they? Enquire. Use
or benefit is in relation to some centre. What is it? Enquire.

D.: Should there be distinction of castes?
M.: Who is it that sees such distinction? Find it out.
D.: I find that it is observed in this Asramam. Probably without the
approval of Sri Bhagavan others observe it here.
M.: Who are you that speak of others, etc.? Did you notice others,
etc., in your sushupti?
D.: I am the individuality here. I may not see others in my sleep but
I see them now.
M.: No doubt you do. But the one who sees now and the one who did
not see in sleep are you only - the same individual. Why should you
notice differences now and be troubled? Be as you were in sleep.
D.: That cannot be. I see it now whereas I do not see it in my sleep.
That does not alter the existing state of affairs.
M.: Do the objects exist in the absence of the subject?
D.: Their existence is independent of the subject.
M.: Do you say that they exist, or do they come and announce their
existence to you?
D.: I know that they exist.
M.: So it is your knowledge of them only. Their existence is not
absolute.
D.: Even if I did not know they will continue to exist.
M.: Do you claim their existence in the absence of your knowledge
of them? (Laughter).
D.: Brahman is equal to all. There cannot be any distinction there.
Caste-distinction is against the highest principle.
M.: Why do you drag in Brahman? He has no grievances. Let him
who has grievances pursue the matter.
D.: You are a Mahatma. You cannot admit castes. But how do the
people here enforce such distinctions?
M.: Did I tell you that I am a Jnani or a mahatma? You are saying it
yourself. Nor did I make a grievance of this caste affair.
D.: Paramatma is the same in all.
M.: Why do you bring in all these names? They can take care of
themselves. They do not require your help.

D.: Mahatma Gandhi also admits equality...
M.: Gandhi is not here.
D.: Aurobindo does not approve of castes. Do you approve of them?
M.: As for Aurobindo, you ask him. As for my opinion, how does it matter
to you? How will it be of use to you? Have you got any opinion on the
matter? That alone will affect you, not the opinion of others.
D.: I do not approve of the caste system. Mahatma’s opinion is
valuable as a guidance. I want your blessings in my attempts.
M.: Mahatma has told you to seek and find your Self. You will not
do it but require his blessings.
D.: I am trying to follow the instructions. But caste-distinction is
painful. It must go.
M.: To whom does it cause pain?
D.: The members of the society...
M.: It is you who say it. There are countries where there are no such
distinctions of caste. Are they free from trouble? There are wars,
internecine struggle, etc. Why do you not remedy the evils there?
D.: There are troubles here also.
M.: Differences are always there. There are not only human beings, but
also animals, plants, etc. The state of affairs cannot be helped.
D.: We do not mind the animals, etc., at present.
M.: Why not? If they could speak they would claim equality with you
and dispute your claims no less vigorously than human beings.
D.: But we cannot help it. It is God’s work.
M.: If that is God’s work then the other part is your work, is that so?
D.: It is man-made distinction.
M.: You need not notice these distinctions. There is diversity in the
world. A unity runs through the diversity. The Self is the same in
all. There is no difference in spirit. All the differences are external
and superficial. You find out the Unity and be happy.
The pain of diversity is overcome by the joy of the perception of
unity. Moreover, a king may disguise himself as a servant. That
makes no difference in the person.

D.: I do not object to differences. But the claims of superiority are wrong.
M.: There are differences in the limbs of one’s body. When the hand
touches the foot the hand is not defiled. Each limb performs its
function. Why do you object to differences?
D.: The people feel the injustice of caste distinction. It must be rooted
out.
M.: You can individually arrive at the state where such distinctions
are not perceived and be happy. How can you hope to reform the
world? Even if you try you cannot succeed. Kavyakantha Ganapati
Sastri offered to initiate Harijans with mantras and make Brahmins
of them. But the Harijans did not come forward to accept the offer.
That shows they are themselves afflicted by an inferiority complex.
Remove that complex first before you try to reform others.
Moreover, why do you go to places where such distinctions are
observed and cause pain to yourself? Why should you not seek
places where they are not observed and be happy there?
Gandhiji also tries to bring about equality. He is also up against
the barrier of inferiority complex afflicting the lower orders. He
cannot enforce his views on others. He observes non-violence. So
matters stand as they are.
D.: We must work to obliterate caste-distinctions.
M.: Then do it. If you have succeeded in the world, then see if the
distinctions persist in this place.
D.: This must be the first place where I want to effect the reform.
M.: Why do you exert yourself so much to effect reforms? Go to sleep
and see if there are differences. There you obliterate differences
without any effort. (Laughter).

Talk 508.
24th August, 1938
An Indian I. C. S. Officer was in the hall for a few hours. He asked: “Can
ahimsa put an end to wars in the world?” Sri Bhagavan did not answer and
it was time to go out for the evening walk. The next day when someone
else repeated the question, Sri Bhagavan said that the question contained its
answer. It is patent that in a state of perfect ahimsa there can be no war.

Talk 509.
26th August, 1938
Mr. MacIver had an interview with Sri Bhagavan and spoke about
diksha.
Sri Bhagavan asked: What is this diksha?
After a pause, He continued, “Diksha is of various kinds, by word,
by sight, by touch and so forth.”
D.: Bhagavan’s is mowna diksha, is it not?
M.: Yes, this the highest form of diksha.
D.: Is it applicable to the vichara marga only?
M.: All the margas are included in the vichara marga.
D.: Yes, but if one wished to take them separately, it would not be
applicable. Would it?
M.: No.
D.: Supposing one feels the need for aids to Realisation these are to
be regarded as belonging to accessory margas. Are they not?
M.: Yes.
D.: And for these then other dikshas would be necessary.
M.: Yes.
D.: From this another question arises: So long as I am at Bhagavan’s
feet, I cannot be regarded as a faithful Christian.
Sri Bhagavan interrupted saying that this was the essence of
Christianity.
D.: Yes, but not in the eyes of the present representatives of the
Church. Accordingly I can no longer look to the side of the Church
for aid.
Have I Bhagavan’s leave to look elsewhere?
M.: That is left to you.
After a pause Sri Bhagavan spoke to the effect that people who come
here are brought by some mysterious Power which will look to their
needs. The conversation practically ended with this.

Talk 510.
7th September, 1938
Mr. T. K. S. Iyer read out a passage from a book which admitted of
five different divisions of antahkaranas as follows: (1) Ullam, (2)
mind, (3) intellect, (4) chittam, (5) ego.
Sri Bhagavan said: Four divisions are usual. The fifth item ullam has
been brought in to correspond to five tattvas thus:
(1) Ullam (consciousness) is akasa (ether) tattva from the cranium
to the brows.
(2) Manas (thinking faculty) is vayu (air) tattva from the brows
to the throat.
(3) Buddhi (intellect) is agni (light) tattva from the throat to the
heart.
(4) Chitta (memory) is jala (water) tattva from the heart to the
navel, and,
(5) Ahankar (ego) is prithvi (earth) tattva from the navel to the
coccyx.
Ullam is thus the pure mind or the mind in its pure being, i.e., mind
divested of all thoughts. It is the ether of mind corresponding to the
expanse of mind without being crowded by thoughts.
When a person wakes up from sleep the head is raised and
there is the light of awareness. This light was already there in
the heart which is later reflected on the brain and appears as
consciousness. But this is not particularised until ahankar steps
in. In the undifferentiated state it is cosmic (cosmic mind or cosmic
consciousness). This state lasts usually for a minute interval and
passes off unnoticed. It becomes particularised or differentiated
by the intrusion of the ego and the person says ‘I’. This is always
associated with an entity (here, the body). So the body is identified
as ‘I’ and all else follows.
Because ullam is only the reflected light, it is said to be the moon.
The original light is in the heart which is said to be the sun.

Talk 511.
9th September, 1938
Major Chadwick had translated Na karmana na prajaya ... into
English. Sri Bhagavan was explaining its meaning. Brahmaloka
may be interpreted subjectively or objectively. The latter meaning
requires faith in the sastras which speak of such lokas, whereas the
former meaning is purely of experience and requires no external
authority. Brahmaloka would mean Brahma jnana (Knowledge of
Brahman) or Self-Realisation (Atma-Sakshatkara). Parantakala as
opposed to aparantakala. In the latter the jivas pass into oblivion to
take other births. Their oblivion is enveloped in ignorance (avidya).
Para is beyond the body. Parantakala is transcendence over the
body, etc., i.e., jnana (knowledge). Paramritat prakriteh = beyond
prakriti. Sarve implies that all are qualified for knowledge and
liberation (moksha). yatayah = yama niyama sametah sat purushah
= good men well disciplined. The whole passage implies passing
into the real beyond the unreal.
na karmana na prajaya dhanena tyagenaike amritatvamanasuh
parena nakam nihitam guhayam, vibhrajate yadyatayo visanti
vedanta vijnana sunishchitarthah sanyasayogadyatayah
shuddha satvah
te brahmaloke tu parantakale paramritat parimuchyanti sarve
dahram vipapam paravesmabhutum yat pundarikam
puramadhya samstham
tatrapi dahram gaganam visokastasmin
yadantastadupasitavyam
yo vedadau svarah prokto vedante cha pratishtitah tasya
prakritilinasya yah parah sa Mahesvarah
[Deathlessness is not obtained through action or begetting offspring
or wealth. Some attain that state through renunciation.
The Sages (that have conquered the senses) attain that Sat which is
more supreme than Heaven and shining all alone in the Heart.
The adepts who by renunciation and one-pointedness are pure in
heart and have known the certainty of Truth by the special knowledge

proclaimed by Vedanta, get fully released in the Brahmaloka from
the causal Maya at the dissolution of the body.
That alone which shines as the tiny Akasa void of sorrow, in the
lotus heart, the tiny seat of the spotless Supreme in the (inner)
core of the body is worthy of worship.
He alone is the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the Primal Word
which is the beginning and end of the Veda and in which merges
the creative Cause].
Mr. T. K. S. Iyer later asked something about muktaloka (region of liberated
souls). Sri Bhagavan said that it meant the same as Brahmaloka.
D.: Asked if some sukshma tanu (subtle body) such as pranava tanu
or suddha tanu (tanu = body; suddha = pure) was required to gain
such loka.
M.: Pranava means real japa. It is however interpreted to be A, U, M,
Nada and Bindu. Of these, the first three are interpreted as Visva,
Taijasa, Prajna and Virat, Hiranyagarbha, Isvara, Nada and Bindu
correspond to prana and manas (mind).
The Mandukya Upanishad speaks of the three matras and turiya
matra. The final meaning is that it represents the real state.
To a further question, Bhagavan answered: There are said to
be Panchapada Mahavakyani (mahavakyas with five words) e.g.,
Tattvamasi atinijam (‘you are that’ is the great truth). The first three
words have their lakshya artha (significance) all of which signify
only the one Truth. So many efforts and so much discipline are said
to be necessary for eradicating the non-existing avidya!

Talk 512.
11th September, 1938
Sri Bhagavan said: All mistake the mind-consciousness for Self-Consciousness.
There is no mind in deep sleep; but no one denies his
being in sleep. Even a child says on waking, “I slept well,” and does not
deny its existence. The ‘I’ rises up, the mind turns outward through the
five senses and perceives objects, this they call direct perception. Asked
if ‘I’ is not directly perceived, they get confused, because ‘I’ does not
announce itself as an object in front and only the perception with the

senses can be recognised by them as knowledge: this habit is so strong
with them. A stanza in Thevaram says: “O sages, eager to get over all
misery, worry not about inferences and examples! Our Light is ever
shining forth from within! With mind clear, live in God!”
This is direct perception. Will the common people admit it? They want
God to appear in front of them as a bright Being mounted on a bull.
Such a vision once originated must also end. It is therefore transient.
Thevaram speaks of the Eternal and Ever-experienced Being. This
Thevaram takes one directly to the Reality.

Talk 513.
16th September, 1938
Major Chadwick again gave his versified translation of the mantra for Sri
Bhagavan to read. Sri Bhagavan softly spoke of the interpretation of the
Bhashyakara and further explained the same. To consider the Brahmaloka
as a region is also admissible. That is what the pouraniks say and many
other schools also imply it by expounding kramamukti (liberation by
degrees). But the Upanishads speak of sadyomukti (immediate liberation)
as in Na tasya prana utkramanti; ihaiva praleeyante - the pranas do not
rise up; they lose themselves here. So Brahmaloka will be Realisation of
Brahman (Brahmasakshatkara). It is a state and not a region. In the latter
case, paramritat must be properly understood. It is para inasmuch as
avyakrita is the causal Energy transcending the universe, amrita because
it persists until the Self is realised. So that paramritat will mean avyakrita.
The kramamukti (liberation by degrees) school say that the upasaka goes
to the region of his Ishta Devata which is Brahmaloka to him. The souls
passing to all other lokas return to be reborn. But those who have gained
the Brahmaloka do not. Moreover those desirous of a particular loka can
by proper methods gain the same. Whereas Brahmaloka cannot be gained
so long as there is any desire left in the person. Desirelessness alone will
confer the loka on him. His desirelessness signifies the absence of the
incentive for rebirth.
The age of Brahma is practically immeasurable. The presiding deity of
the loka is said to have a definite period of life. When he passes away
his loka also is dissolved. The inmates are emancipated at the same

time, irrespective of the different nature of individual consciousness
in them prior to Self-realisation.
The kramamukti school objects to the idea of sadyomukti (immediate
liberation) because the Jnani is supposed to lose body-consciousness
at the same time that ignorance is dispelled but he continues to live in
the body. They ask, “How does the body function without the mind?”
The answer is somewhat elaborate:
Knowledge (jnana) is not incompatible with ignorance (ajnana) because the
Self in purity is found to remain along with ignorance-seed (ajnana beeja)
in sleep. But the incompatibility arises only in the waking and dream states.
Ajnana has two aspects: avarana (veiling) and vikshepa (multiplicity). Of
these, avarana (veiling) denotes the veil hiding the Truth. That prevails in
sleep. Multiplicity (vikshepa) is activity in different times. This gives rise
to diversity and prevails in waking and dream states (jagrat and svapna).
If the veil, i.e., avarana is lifted, the Truth is perceived. It is lifted for a
Jnani and so his karana sarira (causal body) ceases to exist. Vikshepa alone
continues for him. Even so, it is not the same for a Jnani as it is for an ajnani.
The ajnani has all kinds of vasanas, i.e., kartrtva (doership) and bhoktrtva
(enjoyership), whereas the Jnani has ceased to be doer (karta). Thus only
one kind of vasana obtains for him. That too is very weak and does not
overpower him, because he is always aware of the Sat-Chit-Ananda nature
of the Self. The tenuous bhoktrtva vasana is the only remnant of the mind
left in the Jnani and he therefore appears to be living in the body.
This explanation when applied to the mantra amounts to this: A Jnani
has his karana sarira destroyed; the sthula sarira (gross body) has
no effect on him and is for all practical purposes destroyed too. The
sukshma sarira (subtle body) alone remains. It is otherwise called
ativahika sarira. It is this which is held by all persons after the
physical body is given up. And with this they traverse to other lokas
until another suitable physical body is taken. The Jnani is supposed
to move in Brahmaloka with this sukshma sarira. Then that is also
dissolved and he passes to final Liberation.
The whole explanation is meant only for the onlooker. The Jnani
himself will never raise such questions. He knows by his experience
that he is not bound by any kind of limitations.

D.: What is the ‘final emancipation’ according to the foregoing
explanation?
M.: The ativahika or the sukshma sarira corresponds to the pure light
which one experiences just after sleep and before the rise of the ego.
It is Cosmic Consciousness. That is only the Light reflected from
the Heart. When the reflection ceases and abides as the Original
Light in the Heart it is final emancipation.
D.: But Yoga Vasishtha says that the chitta (mind) of a jivanmukta is
achala (unchanging).
M.: So it is. Achala chitta (unchanging mind) is the same as suddha
manas (pure mind). The jnani’s manas is said to be suddha manas.
The Yoga Vasishtha also says that Brahman is no other than the
jnani’s mind. So Brahman is suddha manas only.
D.: Will the description of Brahman as Sat-Chit-Ananda suit
this suddha manas? For this too will be destroyed in the final
emancipation.
M.: If suddha manas is admitted, the Bliss (Ananda) experienced
by the Jnani must also be admitted to be reflected. This reflection
must finally merge into the Original. Therefore the jivanmukti
state is compared to the reflection of a spotless mirror in another
similar mirror. What will be found in such a reflection? Pure Akasa
(Ether). Similarly, the jnani’s reflected Bliss (Ananda) represents
only the true Bliss.
These are all only words. It is enough that a person becomes
antarmukhi (inward-bent). The sastras are not needed for an
inward turned mind. They are meant for the rest.
Talk 514.
Mr. MacIver, a resident devotee, asked Sri Bhagavan if he might go
to Switzerland where a Guru was inviting him. Sri Bhagavan said:
Some Force brought him here and the same is taking him to Europe.
Let him always remember that the world is only a projection of the
mind, and the mind is in the Self. Wherever the body may move the
mind must be kept under control. The body moves, but not the Self.
The world is within the Self, that is all.

Talk 515.
17th September, 1938
D.: In the explanation given yesterday, it is said that the removal of
avarana results in the annihilation of the karana sarira. That is
clear. But how is the gross body considered to fall off too?
M.: The vasanas are of two kinds: bandha hetu (causing bondage) and
bhoga hetu (only giving enjoyment). The Jnani has transcended the
ego and therefore all the causes of bondage are inoperative. Bandha
hetu is thus at an end and prarabdha (past karma) remains as bhoga
vasana (to give enjoyment) only. Therefore it was said that the sukshma
sarira alone survives jnana. Kaivalya says that sanchita Karma (stored
Karma) is at an end simultaneously with the rise of jnana; that agami
(Karma now collecting) is no longer operative owing to the absence
of the sense of bondage, and that prarabdha will be exhausted by
enjoyment (bhoga) only. Thus the last one will end in course of time
and then the gross body also falls away with it.
Sarira traya (the three bodies) and Karma traya (the three Karmas)
are mere phrases meant for the delectation of debaters. A Jnani is
not affected by any of them.
An aspirant is instructed to find who he is. If he does so, he will
take no interest in discussing such matters as the above. Find the
Self and rest in Peace.

Talk 516.
22nd September, 1938
A question arose if the world is real or unreal, since it is claimed to be
both by the advaitins themselves. Sri Bhagavan said that it is unreal
if viewed as apart from the Self and real if viewed as the Self.

Talk 517.
25th September, 1938
There was some reference of two slokas in Yoga Vasishtha where spiritism
in mlechcha desa is mentioned. Mr. MacIver said that black magic is more
prevalent in the West than is ordinarily known to the observer. The writer
then remembered how Mr. Paul Brunton had once said that he actually
feared a woman for her association with black magic.

Sri Bhagavan asked if the gentleman had read Devikalottaram. He
then said that abhichara prayoga (black magic) is condemned there.
He also added that by such practices one compasses one’s own ruin.
Avidya (ignorance) is itself bad and makes one commit suicide. Why
should black magic be also added to it?
D.: What is the pratikriya (remedy) open to the victim of black magic?
M.: Bhakti (devotion to God).
D.: Non-resistance seems to be the only remedy for all kinds of evil
such as slander.
M.: Quite so. If one abuses another or injures him the remedy does
not lie in retort or resistance. Simply keep quiet. This quiet will
bring peace to the injured but make the offender restless until he
is driven to admit his error to the injured party.
This black magic is said to have been used even against the greatest
saints in India since time immemorial. The tapasvis of Daruka
forest used it against Siva Himself.
Then the conversation turned on Brahmaloka.
Sri Bhagavan said Brahmaloka is the same as Atmaloka. Again
Brahmaiva lokah = Brahmalokah (Brahma is Himself the region)
and Brahma is Atma. So Brahmaloka is only the Self.
Loka, aloka are both synonymous. It is the same as andamillakkan in
Ulladu Narpadu. Lokyate iti lokah (That which is seen is loka).

Talk 518.
27th September, 1938
Mr. V. Gupta, a Telugu Pandit, is on a visit here. Sri Bhagavan said in
the course of conversation: Ahamkriti (the ego) is not the same as aham.
The latter is the Supreme Reality whereas the former is the ego. It is
to be overcome before the Truth is realised. The Supreme Being is
unmanifest and the first sign of manifestation is Aham Sphurana (light
of ‘I’). The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad says Aham nama abhavat (He
became ‘I’ named). That is the original name of the Reality.
The Pandit asked about the operation of Grace. Is it the mind of the
Guru acting on the mind of the disciple or anything different?

M.: The Highest Form of Grace is Silence (mowna). It is also the
highest upadesa.
D.: Vivekananda has also said that silence is the loudest form of prayer.
M.: It is so, for the seeker’s silence Guru’s silence is the loudest
upadesa. It is also Grace in its highest form. All other dikshas
(initiations), e.g., sparsa, chakshus are derived from mowna
(silence). They are therefore secondary. Mowna is the primary form.
If the Guru is silent the seeker’s mind gets purified by itself.
D.: Is it proper that one prays to God or Guru when one is afflicted
by worldly ills?
M.: Undoubtedly.
Talk 519.
M.: The mahavakyas and their interpretation lead to interminable
discussions and keep the minds of the seekers engaged externally. To
turn the mind inward the man must directly settle down in the ‘I’. Then
there is an end of external activities and perfect Peace prevails.
Later, a passage from the Yoga Vasishtha was read out before Sri
Bhagavan, indicating initiation by look and initiation by touch.
Sri Bhagavan observed: Dakshinamurti observed silence when the
disciples approached Him. That is the highest form of initiation. It
includes the other forms. There must be subject-object relationship
established in the other dikshas. First the subject must emanate
and then the object. Unless these two are there how is the one to
look at the other or touch him? Mowna diksha is the most perfect;
it comprises looking, touching and teaching. It will purify the
individual in every way and establish him in the Reality.
Talk 520.
An Australian gentleman (Mr. Lowman) is on a visit here. He seems
to be studying the Hindu system of Philosophy. He started saying that
he believed in unity, the jiva is yet in illusion and so on.
M.: What is the unity you believe in? How can the jiva find a place in it?
D.: The Unity is the Absolute.
M.: The jiva cannot find a place in Unity.

D.: But the jiva has not realised the Absolute and imagines itself
separate.
M.: Jiva is separate because it must exist in order to imagine
something.
D.: But it is unreal.
M.: Any unreal thing cannot produce effects. It is like saying that you killed
some animal with the horn of a hare. A hare does not grow horns.
D.: I see the absurdity. But I speak from the physical plane.
M.: You say, ‘I’. Who is that ‘I’? If that is found you can later say
whose is the illusion.
A little later Sri Bhagavan asked:
You say you are in the physical plane now. In which plane are you
in dreamless sleep?
D.: I think in the physical plane again.
M.: You say, “I think”. That means that you are saying it now when you are
awake. Anyway you admit that you exist in deep sleep. Don’t you?
D.: Yes, but I did not function then.
M.: So then, you existed in deep sleep. You are the same one who
continues to exist? Are you not?
D.: Yes.
M.: With this difference - that you did not function in your sleep.
Rather you are associated with the thinking faculty in your waking
state and you are dissociated from it in sleep. Is it not so?
D.: Yes.
M.: Which is then your real nature? Is it to be associated with thinking
or to be dissociated?
D.: I see it now. But I was not aware of my being in sleep.
M.: You say so now. You do not say so in your sleep. Or do you deny
your being (very existence in sleep)?
D.: No.
M.: It amounts to this that you exist in both states. The Absolute Existence
is the Self. You are also conscious of the Existence. That Existence is
also consciousness (Sat and Chit). That is your real nature.

D.: But thinking is necessary even for realisation.
M.: That thinking is aimed at the elimination of all thinking.
D.: Owing to my ignorance, I do not realise the Absolute Existence-Consciousness.
M.: Who is the ‘I’? Whose is the ignorance! Answers to these questions
will alone suffice to prove that you are already realised. Is there
anyone who denies his own existence? Or can anyone say that he
did not exist in his sleep? Pure Existence is thus admitted. The
admission also implies consciousness. Thus all men are realised.
There is no ignorant man at all.
D.: Yes, I understand. But I have a small question to ask. The state of
Realisation is one of desirelessness. If a human being is desireless
he ceases to be human.
M.: You admit your existence in sleep. You did not function then. You
were not aware of any gross body. You did not limit yourself to this
body. So you could not find anything separate from your Self.
Now in your waking state you continue to be the same Existence
with the limitations of the body added. These limitations make you
see other objects. Hence arises desire. But the state of desirelessness
in sleep made you no less happy than now. You did not feel any
want. You did not make yourself miserable by not entertaining
desires. But now you entertain desires because you are limited to
this human frame. Why do you wish to retain these limitations and
continue to entertain desires?
Sri Bhagavan continued:
Does the body tell you that it is there? It is certainly something
apart from the body that remains aware. What is it?
Do you say that it is the ‘I’, meaning the ego which arises
simultaneously with the waking of the individual from sleep? Be
it so. The body is not sentient. The Absolute does not speak. The
ego does. One does not aspire for liberation in sleep. The aspiration
arises only in the waking state. The functions of the waking state
are those of the ego which is synonymous with the ‘I’. Find out
who this ‘I’ is. On doing so and abiding as ‘I’, all these doubts
will be cleared up.

Talk 521.
28th September, 1938
Some Congressmen handed over the following questions to Maharshi:
1. How long is India destined to suffer bondage?
2. Have not the sons of India made enough sacrifice for her liberation?
3. Will India get freedom during Mahatma Gandhi’s lifetime?
The above questions were not answered categorically. Sri Bhagavan
simply remarked:
Gandhiji has surrendered himself to the Divine and works accordingly with
no self-interest. He does not concern himself with the results but accepts
them as they turn up. That must be the attitude of national workers.
Q.: Will the work be crowned with success?
M.: This question arises because the questioner has not surrendered
himself.
Q.: Should we not then think of and work for the welfare of the
country?
M.: First take care of yourself and the rest will naturally follow.
Q.: I am not speaking individually but for the country.
M.: First surrender and see. The doubts arise because of the absence of
surrender. Acquire strength by surrender and then your surroundings will
be found to have improved to the degree of strength acquired by you.
Q.: Should we not know if our actions will be worthwhile?
M.: Follow the example of Gandhiji in the work for the national cause.
‘Surrender’ is the word.
The following slip was also handed over to Sri Bhagavan:
“Four of us have come from Coorg and we had gone to Delhi to wait as
a deputation on the Working Committee of the Indian National Congress
and we are now going back. We are sent from the Coorg Congress
Committee and so kindly give us some message to the Coorg District
Congress Committee and the people of Coorg in general.”
When this slip was handed over, Sri Bhagavan said that the same answer
holds good here too. The message is contained in the word ‘Surrender’.

Talk 522.
29th September, 1938
A visitor asked Sri Bhagavan: I want knowledge.
M.: Who wants knowledge?
D.: I want it.
M.: Who is that ‘I’? Find the ‘I’ and see later what further knowledge
is required.

Talk 523.
2nd October, 1938
A Pilgrims’ special train brought several visitors from Bengal. One
of them said that he had read Mr. Paul Brunton’s book and since
then he was anxious to see Sri Bhagavan. He also asked: How shall
I overcome my passions?
M.: Find their root and then it will be easy. (Later) What are the
passions? Kama (lust), krodha (anger), etc. Why do they arise?
Because of likes and dislikes towards the objects seen. How do the
objects project themselves in your view? Because of your avidya,
i.e., ignorance. Ignorance of what? Of the Self. Thus, if you find
the Self and abide therein there will be no trouble owing to the
passions.
(Later) Again, what is the cause of the passions? Desire to be happy
or enjoy pleasure. Why does the desire for happiness arise? Because
your nature is happiness itself and it is natural that you come into
your own. This happiness is not found anywhere besides the Self.
Do not look for it elsewhere. But seek the Self and abide therein.
Still again, that happiness which is natural is simply re-discovered,
so it cannot be lost. Whereas the happiness arising from other
objects are external and thus liable to be lost. Therefore it cannot
be permanent and so it is not worth seeking.
Moreover craving for pleasures should not be encouraged. One
cannot put out burning fire by pouring petrol over it. An attempt
to satisfy your craving for the time being, so that the passion may
later be suppressed, is simply foolish.

There are, no doubt, other methods for the suppression of passion.
They are (1) regulated food, (2) fasting, (3) yoga practice, (4)
medicines. But their effects are transitory. The passions reappear
with greater force as soon as the check is removed. The only way
to overcome them is to eradicate them. That is done by finding
their source as stated above.
Talk 524.
Another pilgrim asked: I am a man with a family. Is it possible for
those in a family to get release, and if so how?
M.: Now what is family? Whose family is it? If the answers to these
questions are found the other questions solve themselves.
Tell me: Are you in the family, or is the family in you?
The visitor did not answer. Then Sri Bhagavan’s answer was
continued: Who are you? You include three aspects of life, namely,
the waking, the dream and the sleep states. You were not aware of the
family and their ties in your sleep and so these questions did not arise
then. But now you are aware of the family and their ties and therefore
you seek release. But you are the same person throughout.
D.: Because I now feel that I am in the family it is right that I should
seek release.
M.: You are right. But consider and say: Are you in the family or is
the family in you?
Another visitor interposed: What is family?
M.: That’s it. It must be known.
D.: There is my wife and there are also my children. They are
dependent on me. That is the family.
M.: Do the members of the family bind your mind? Or do you bind
yourself to them? Do they come and say to you “We form your
family. Be with us”? Or do you consider them as your family and
that you are bound to them?
D.: I consider them as my family and feel bound to them.
M.: Quite so. Because you think that so-and-so is your wife and so-and-so
are your children you also think that you are bound to them.
These thoughts are yours. They owe their very existence to you.

You can entertain these thoughts or relinquish them. The former
is bondage and the latter is release.
D.: It is not quite clear to me.
M.: You must exist in order that you may think. You may think these
thoughts or other thoughts. The thoughts change but not you. Let
go the passing thoughts and hold on to the unchanging Self. The
thoughts form your bondage. If they are given up, there is release.
The bondage is not external. So no external remedy need be sought
for release. It is within your competence to think and thus to get
bound or to cease thinking and thus be free.
D.: But it is not easy to remain without thinking.
M.: You need not cease thinking. Only think of the root of the thoughts;
seek it and find it. The Self shines by itself. When that is found the
thoughts cease of their own accord. That is freedom from bondage.
D.: Yes. I understand it now. I have learnt it now. Is a Guru necessary?
M.: So long as you consider yourself as an individual, a Guru is
necessary to show to you that you are not bound by limitations
and that your nature is to be free from limitations.
Talk 525.
Another visitor asked: Actions are bondage. One cannot remain
without some kind of activity. So bondage goes on increasing.
What is one to do under the circumstances?
M.: One should act in such a manner that the bondage is not
strengthened but gets weakened. That is selfless action.

Talk 526.
3rd October, 1938
A visitor asked Sri Bhagavan: People give some names to God and
say that the name is sacred and repetitions of the name bestow
merit on the individual. Can it be true?
M.: Why not? You bear a name to which you answer. But your body
was not born with that name written on it, nor did it say to anyone
that it bore such and such a name. And yet a name is given to you
and you answer to that name, because you have identified yourself

with the name. Therefore the name signifies something and it is not
a mere fiction. Similarly, God’s name is effective. Repetition of the
name is remembrance of what it signifies. Hence its merit.
But the man did not look satisfied. Finally he wanted to retire and
prayed for Sri Bhagavan’s Grace.
Sri Bhagavan now asked how mere sounds assuring him of Grace
would satisfy him unless he had faith.
Both laughed and the visitor retired.

Talk 527.
4th October, 1938
A group of respectable Coorg ladies was in the hall.
One of them asked: I have received a mantra. People frighten me saying
that it may have unforeseen results if repeated. It is only Pranava.
So I seek advice. May I repeat it? I have considerable faith in it.
M.: Certainly, it should be repeated with faith.
D.: Will it do by itself? Or can you kindly give me any further
instructions?
M.: The object of mantra japa is to realise that the same japa is
already going on in oneself even without effort. The oral japa
becomes mental and the mental japa finally reveals itself as being
eternal. That mantra is the person’s real nature. That is also the
state of realisation.
D.: Can the bliss of samadhi be gained thus?
M.: The japa becomes mental and finally reveals itself as the Self.
That is samadhi.
D.: Please show Grace to me and strengthen me in my efforts!

Talk 528.
13th October, 1938
A middle-aged Andhra man asked: “Is thought of God necessary for
fixing one’s sight (or making the mind one-pointed)?”
M.: What is the practice?

D.: To fix the look.
M.: What for?
D.: To gain concentration.
M.: The practice gives work for the eye right enough; but where is
the work for the mind in the process?
D.: What should I do for it?
M.: Thought of God, certainly.
D.: Does the practice make one ill?
M.: Maybe. But all will be rightly adjusted of its own accord.
D.: I practised dhyana for four hours a day and fixation of sight for
two hours. I became ill. Then others said that it was owing to my
practice. So I gave up dhyana.
M.: Matters will adjust themselves.
D.: Is it not better that the gaze of the eye becomes fixed naturally?
M.: What do you mean?
D.: Is practice necessary to fix the gaze or is it better to leave it to
happen of its own accord?
M.: What is practice if it is not an attempt to make something natural?
It will become natural after long practice.
D.: Is pranayama necessary?
M.: Yes. It is useful.
D.: I did not practise it. But should I undertake it?
M.: Everything will be all right with sufficient strength of mind.
D.: How shall I get the strength of mind?
M.: By pranayama.
D.: Is food-regulation also necessary?
M.: It is certainly useful.
D.: Should my contemplation be on the Infinite or the limited
being?
M.: What do you mean?
D.: May I contemplate on Sri Krishna or Sri Rama alternately?
M.: Bhavana implies khanda i.e., division.

Talk 529.
15th October, 1938
In the course of conversation Sri Bhagavan said that Thirujnanasambandar
had sung in praise of Sri Arunachala.
He also mentioned the story briefly as follows:
Jnanasambandar was born in an orthodox family about 1,500 years
ago. When he was three years old his father took him to the temple in
Shiyali. He left the boy on the bank of the sacred tank and went in to
bathe. As he dipped in the water the boy, not finding his father, began
to cry out. Immediately Siva and Parvati appeared in a vimana. Siva
told Parvati to feed the boy with her milk. So she drew out milk in a
cup and handed it to the boy. He drank it and was happy.
The father as he came out of the water saw the boy smiling and with
streaks of milk round his lips. So he asked the boy what happened
to him. The boy did not answer. He was threatened and the boy sang
songs. They were hymns in praise of Siva who appeared before him.
He sang, “The One with ear-rings... the Robber, who robbed me of
my mind....”
He thus became one of the most famous bhaktas and was much sought
after. He led a vigorous and active life; went on pilgrimage to several
places in South India. He got married in his sixteenth year. The bride
and the bridegroom went to have darsan of God in the local temple
soon after the marriage ceremonies were over. A large party went
with them. When they reached the temple the place was a blaze of
light and the temple was not visible. There was however a passage
visible in the blaze of light. Jnanasambandar told the people to enter
the passage. They did so. He himself went round the light with his
young wife, came to the passage and entered it as the others had done
earlier. The Light vanished leaving no trace of those who entered it.
The temple again came into view as usual. Such was the brief but
very eventful life of the sage.
In one of his tours he had come to Ariyanainallur or Tirukkoilur, eighteen
miles from Tiruvannamalai. The place is famous for its Siva temple.
(It was here that Sri Bhagavan had that vision of Light on his way to

Tiruvannamalai in his seventeenth year. Sri Bhagavan did not then
know that the place was sanctified by the feet of Tirujnanasambandar
some fifteen centuries ago.)
When the ancient sage was staying in Ariyanainallur an old man
who carried a flower-basket came to him. The young sage asked the
old man who he was. The latter replied that he was a servitor of Sri
Arunachala the God residing as the Hill here.
Sage: How far is it from here?
The old man: I walk every day from there to here collecting flowers
for daily worship. So it is only near.
Sage: Then I shall go with you to that place.
The old man: A rare pleasure, indeed, for me!
They went together, with a large crowd following the Sage. After walking
some distance the Sage wanted to ask how much further the place was.
But the old man had disappeared in the meantime. Soon after, a gang of
dacoits waylaid the pilgrims who surrendered all that they had with them.
They plodded their way and reached their destination. The young Sage
fell into contemplation. God appeared and said that the dacoits were only
His followers and that his needs would be met. Accordingly, the group
of pilgrims found all their wants. The Sage had sung hymns in praise of
Sri Arunachala. In one of the stanzas, he says:
“You are a dense mass of jnana, capable of removing the ‘I-am-the-body’ idea
from Your devotees! Herds of gazelles, of boars and of
bears come down Your slopes in the night to search for food on the
plains. Herds of elephants go from the plains to Your slopes where
they may rest. So different herds of animals meet on Your slopes.”
Sri Bhagavan continued: So this Hill must have been a dense forest
1,500 years ago. It has since been denuded of the forests by the woodcutters,
etc., through these several centuries.
The account of Sri Arunachala given by the mysterious old man to
Jnanasambandar is contained in 300 slokas in Upamanyu’s Bhakta
Charita. One of the Archakas of the temple had it with him and showed
it to Sri Bhagavan on the occasion of the temple suit within the last
few months. Sri Bhagavan copied the slokas.

Talk 530.
The following is taken from the diary of Annamalai Swami, a good
devotee of Sri Bhagavan and resident of Sri Ramanasramam:
The Teachings of Sri Ramana Bhagavan.
(1) That man who is active in the world and yet remains desireless,
without losing sight of his own essential nature, is alone a true man.
This was in answer to the Swami who wanted to retire into a cave for
practising meditation.
(2) He asked about sannyas. Should not a man renounce everything
in order that he might get Liberation?
M.: Even better than the man who thinks “I have renounced everything”
is the one who does his duty but does not think “I do this” or “I am
the doer”. Even a sannyasi who thinks “I am a sannyasi” cannot
be a true sannyasi, whereas a householder who does not think “I
am a householder” is truly a sannyasi.
Talk 531.
D.: One person says one thing one way. Another says the same thing
in a different way. How is the truth to be ascertained?
M.: Each one sees his own Self only, always and everywhere. He finds
the world and God according to what he is.
A Nayanar went to Kalahasti for the darsan of God. He saw all the
people there as Siva and Sakti because he himself was so. Again,
Dharmaputra considered that the whole world was composed of
people having some merit or other and that each of them was
even better than he himself for some reason or other. Whereas
Duryodhana could not find even a single good person in the world.
Each reflects his own nature.
Talk 532.
D.: Is there no way of escape from the miseries of the world?
M.: There is only one way and that consists in not losing sight of
one’s Self under any circumstances.
To enquire “Who am I?” is the only remedy for all the ills of the
world. It is also perfect bliss.

Talk 533.
Soon after the announcement in the newspapers that Gandhiji was going
to fast for twenty-one days in Yerwada jail, two young men came to
Sri Bhagavan; they were very excited.
They said “Mahatma is now fasting for twenty-one days. We want
permission from Sri Bhagavan to run up to Yerwada so that we may
also fast as long as he does. Please permit us. We are in a haste to
go.” Saying so they made ready to rush out.
Sri Bhagavan smiled and said, “It is a good sign that you have such
feelings. But what can you do now? Get the strength which Gandhiji
has already got by his tapasya. You will afterwards succeed.”
Talk 534.
Sri Bhagavan often used to say, “Mowna is the utmost eloquence.
Peace is utmost activity. How? Because the person remains in his
essential nature and so he permeates all the recesses of the Self.
Thus he can call up any power into play whenever or wherever it is
necessary. That is the highest siddhi.”
Annamalai asked: Namadev, Tukaram, Tulsidas and others are said
to have seen Maha Vishnu. How did they see Him?
M.: In what manner? Just in the same manner as you see me now and I
see you here. They would also have seen Vishnu in this way only.
(He records that, on hearing it, his hairs stood on end and an intense
joy overpowered him.)
Talk 535.
Once ‘A’ asked: How can one be worshipful while engaged in daily
work?
Sri Bhagavan did not reply. Ten minutes passed. A few girls came for darsan
of Sri Bhagavan. They began to sing and dance. Their song was to the
effect: “We will churn the milk without losing thought of Krishna.”
Sri Bhagavan turned to the Swami and said that there was the reply
to his question.
This state is called Bhakti, Yoga and Karma.

Talk 536.
The person soaked in the “I-am-the-body” idea is the greatest sinner
and he is a suicide. The experience of “I-am-the-Self” is the highest
virtue. Even a moment’s dhyana to that effect is enough to destroy
all the sanchita Karma. It works like the sun before whom darkness
is dispelled. If one remains always in dhyana, can any sin, however
heinous it be, survive his dhyana?
Talk 537.
Once Sri Bhagavan said, “Desire constitutes maya, and desirelessness
is God.”
Talk 538.
‘A’ asked: What is the exact difference between worldly activity and
dhyana?
M.: There is no difference. It is like naming one and the same thing by
two different words in two different languages. The crow has two
eyes but only one iris which is rolled into either eye as it pleases.
The trunk of an elephant is used for breathing and for drinking
water. The snake sees and hears with the same organ.
Talk 539.
When Sri Bhagavan was going up the hill, the Swami asked: Does the
closing or the opening of the eyes make any difference during dhyana?
M.: If you strike on a wall with a rubber-ball and you stand at a
distance, the ball rebounds and runs back to you. If you stand near
the wall, the ball rebounds and runs away from you. Even if the
eyes are closed, the mind follows thoughts.
Talk 540.
Once ‘A’ asked: There is more pleasure in dhyana than in sensual
enjoyments. Yet the mind runs after the latter and does not seek the
former. Why is it so?
M.: Pleasure or pain are aspects of the mind only. Our essential nature is
happiness. But we have forgotten the Self and imagine that the body or
the mind is the Self. It is that wrong identity that gives rise to misery.

What is to be done? This vasana is very ancient and has continued for
innumerable past births. Hence it has grown strong. That must go
before the essential nature, viz., happiness, asserts itself.
Talk 541.
A certain visitor asked Sri Bhagavan:
There is so much misery in the world because wicked men abound
in the world. How can one find happiness here?
M.: All are gurus to us. The wicked say by their evil deeds, “Do not
come near me”. The good are always good. So then, all persons
are like gurus to us.
Talk 542.
‘A’ asked: I often desire to live in solitude where I can find all I want
with ease, so that I may devote all my time to meditation only. Is
such a desire good or bad?
M.: Such thoughts will bestow a janma (reincarnation) for their fulfilment.
What does it matter where and how you are placed? The essential point
is that the mind must always remain in its source. There is nothing
external which is not also internal. The mind is all. If the mind is active
even solitude becomes like a market place. There is no use closing
your eyes. Close the mental eye and all will be right. The world is not
external to you. The good persons will not care to make plans previous
to their actions. Why so? For God who has sent us into the world has
His own plan and that will certainly work itself out.
Talk 543.
Many visitors came on one occasion and they all saluted Sri Bhagavan
with the single prayer, “Make me a bhakta. Give me moksha.” After
they left Sri Bhagavan said, thinking aloud: All of them want bhakti
and moksha. If I say to them, ‘Give yourself to me’ they will not. How
then can they get what they want?
Talk 544.
On one occasion a few devotees were discussing among themselves
the relative merits of some famous bhaktas. They did not agree among
themselves and referred the matter to Sri Bhagavan. He remained
silent. The discussion grew hot.

Finally Sri Bhagavan said: One cannot know about another nor can
confer bondage or release on another. Each one desires to become
famous in the world. It is natural for man. But that desire alone does
not bring about the end in view. He who is not accepted by God is
certainly humiliated. He who has surrendered himself, body and mind,
to God becomes famous all over the world.
Talk 545.
‘A’ was once badly distracted by sexual thoughts.
He fought against them. He fasted three days and prayed to God so
that he might be free from such thoughts. Finally, he decided to ask
Sri Bhagavan about it.
Sri Bhagavan listened to him and remained silent for about two
minutes. Then He said: Well, the thoughts distracted you and you
fought against them. That is good. Why do you continue to think of
them now? Whenever such thoughts arise, consider to whom they
arise and they will flee away from you.
Talk 546.
‘A’ asked: A person does something good but he sometimes suffers
pain even in his right activities. Another does something wicked
but is also happy. Why should it be so?
M.: Pain or pleasure is the result of past Karma and not of the present
Karma. Pain and pleasure alternate with each other. One must suffer
or enjoy them patiently without being carried away by them. One
must always try to hold on to the Self. When one is active one
should not care for the results and must not be swayed by the pain
or pleasure met with occasionally. He who is indifferent to pain or
pleasure can alone be happy.
Talk 547.
D.: What is the significance of Guru’s Grace in the attainment of
liberation?
M.: Liberation is not anywhere outside you. It is only within. If a man is
anxious for Deliverance, the Guru within pulls him in and the Guru
without pushes him into the Self. This is the Grace of the Guru.

Talk 548.
A visitor asked Sri Bhagavan (in writing) the following questions:
(1) Were the differences in the world simultaneous, with creation?
Or are they of later growth? (2) Is the Creator impartial? Then why is
one born lame, another blind, and so on? (3) Are the eight Dikpalas,
thirty-three crores of gods and the seven rishis existent even today?
M.: Refer these questions to yourself and the answer will be found.
After a pause, Sri Bhagavan continued: if we first know our Self
then all other matters will be plain to us. Let us know our Self and
then enquire concerning the Creator and creation. Without first
knowing the Self, to seek knowledge of God, etc., is ignorance.
A man suffering from jaundice sees everything yellow. If he tells
others that all things are yellow who will accept his statement?
The creation is said to have an origin. How? Like a tree and the
seed from which it has grown. How was the seed produced? From a
similar tree. Where is the end to the series of questions? Therefore
one must know one’s Self before the world is known.
Talk 549.
Sri Bhagavan often speaks of namaskar (prostration) in the following
strain: “This namaskar was originally meant by the ancient sages to
serve as a means of surrender to God. The act still prevails but not the
spirit behind it. The doer of namaskar intends to deceive the object
of worship by his act. It is mostly insincere and deceitful. It is meant
to cover up innumerable sins. Can God be deceived? The man thinks
that God accepts his namaskar and that he himself is free to continue
his old life. They need not come to me. I am not pleased with these
namaskars. The people should keep their minds clean; instead of that
they bend themselves or lie prostrate before me. I am not deceived
by such acts.”
Talk 550.
Somerset Maugham, a well-known English author, was on a visit to
Sri Bhagavan. He also went to see Maj. Chadwick in his room and
there he suddenly became unconscious. Maj. Chadwick requested Sri
Bhagavan to see him. Sri Bhagavan went into the room, took a seat
and gazed on Mr. Maugham. He regained his senses and saluted Sri

Bhagavan. They remained silent and sat facing each other for nearly
an hour. The author attempted to ask questions but did not speak. Maj.
Chadwick encouraged him to ask. Sri Bhagavan said, “All finished.
Heart-talk is all talk. All talk must end in silence only.” They smiled
and Sri Bhagavan left the room.
Talk 551.
A man asked Sri Bhagavan: “How is it that Atma vidya is said to be
the easiest?”
M.: Any other vidya requires a knower, knowledge and the object to
be known, whereas this does not require any of them. It is the Self.
Can anything be so obvious as that? Hence it is the easiest. All that
you need do is to enquire, “Who am I?”
A man’s true name is mukti (liberation)
Talk 552.
There are some buildings in the Asramam. They used to have some plan
which somehow could not be followed in entirety. Therefore ‘A’ and the
Sarvadhikari did not agree on many details and there used to be trouble
between them. ‘A’ was once highly disgusted with the state of affairs. He
asked Sri Bhagavan what could be done under the circumstances.
Sri Bhagavan said: “Which of the buildings was according to a plan
made by these people here? God has His own plans and all these go
on according to that. No one need worry as to what happens.”
Talk 553.
The Asramites once asked Sri Bhagavan, “How were we all in our
previous births? Why do we not know our own past?”
M.: God in His mercy has withheld this knowledge from people.
If they knew that they were virtuous, they will grow proud;
contrariwise they will be depressed. Both are bad. It is enough
that one knows the Self.
Talk 554.
M.: Just as a river does not continue its flow after its discharge into the ocean,
so also a person loses all movements after he merges in the Self.

Talk 555.
Sri Bhagavan once recounted how Kavyakantha Ganapathi Muni
asked Him: My own opinion is that a man can live on Rs. 3 a month.
What is Sri Bhagavan’s opinion in the matter?
M.: A man can live happily only if he knows that he requires nothing
wherewith to live.
Talk 556.
Maj. Chadwick asked Sri Bhagavan one night: The world is said to
become manifest after the mind becomes manifest. There is no mind
when I sleep. Is the world not existent to others at that time? Does it
not show that the world is the product of a universal mind? How then
shall we say that the world is not material but only dream-like?
M.: The world does not tell you that it is of the individual mind or
of the universal mind. It is only the individual mind that sees the
world. When this mind disappears the world also disappears.
There was a man who saw in his dream his father who had died thirty
years earlier. Furthermore he dreamt that he had four more brothers
and that his father divided his property among them. A quarrel
ensued, the brothers assaulted the man and he woke up in a fright.
Then he remembered that he was all alone, he had no brothers and
the father was dead long ago. His fright gave place to contentment.
So you see - when we see our Self there is no world, and when we
lose sight of the Self we get ourselves bound in the world.
Talk 557.
A visitor asked: “We are advised to concentrate on the spot in the
forehead between the eyebrows. Is it right?”
M.: Everyone is aware, ‘I am’. Leaving aside that awareness one goes about
in search of God. What is the use of fixing one’s attention between the
eyebrows? It is mere folly to say that God is between the eyebrows.
The aim of such advice is to help the mind to concentrate. It is one of
the forcible methods to check the mind and prevent its dissipation. It is
forcibly directed into one channel. It is a help to concentration.
But the best means of realisation is the enquiry “Who am I?” The present
trouble is to the mind and it must be removed by the mind only.

D.: Are there restrictions to be observed in food?
M.: Sattva food taken in moderation.
D.: There are several asanas mentioned. Which of them is the
best?
M.: Nididhyasana (one-pointedness of the mind) is the best.
Talk 558.
A visitor asked: “Sri Bhagavan! When I heard of you, a strong desire
arose in me to see you. Why should it be so?”
M.: The desire arose in the same way as the body arises to the Self.
D.: What is the purpose of life?
M.: To seek to know the significance of life is itself the result of good
karma in past births. Those who do not seek such knowledge are
simply wasting their lives.
Talk 559.
A man asked Sri Bhagavan: “Sri Bhagavan can know when I shall
become a Jnani. Please tell me when it will be.”
M.: If I am Bhagavan then there is no one apart from me to whom
jnana should arise or to whom I should speak. If I am an ordinary
man like others then I am as ignorant as the rest. Either way your
question cannot be answered.
Talk 560.
When Sri Bhagavan was taking His bath a few bhaktas were around
Him, speaking to themselves. Then they asked Him about the use of
ganja (hashish). Sri Bhagavan had finished His bath by that time. He
said: “Oh ganja! The users feel immensely happy when they are under
its influence. How shall I describe their happiness! They simply shout
ananda! ananda ...” Saying so, He walked as if tipsy. The bhaktas
laughed. He appeared as if He stumbled, placed His hands round ‘A’
and cried “ananda! ananda!”
‘A’ records that his very being was transformed from that time. He
had remained an inmate for the past eight years. He further says that
his mind now remains at peace.

Talk 561.
D.: What is svarupa (form) and arupa (formless) of the mind?
M.: When you wake up from sleep a light appears, that is the light
of the Self passing through Mahat tattva. It is called cosmic
consciousness. That is arupa. The light falls on the ego and is
reflected therefrom. Then the body and the world are seen. This
mind is svarupa. The objects appear in the light of this reflected
consciousness. This light is called jyoti.

Talk 562.
21st October, 1938
There is a statement in the book Vichara Sangraha that though a person
realises the Self once, he cannot, for that simple reason alone, become
a mukta. He continues to remain a victim of vasanas (latencies). Sri
Bhagavan was asked whether the realisation referred to was the same as
the jnani’s, and if so why there should be a difference in their effects.
M.: The experience is the same. Every person experiences the Self
consciously or unconsciously. The ajnani’s experience is clouded
by his latencies whereas the jnani’s is not so. The jnani’s experience
of the Self is therefore distinct and permanent.
A practiser may by long practice gain a glimpse of the Reality. This
experience may be vivid for the time being. And yet he will be
distracted by the old vasanas and so his experience will not avail
him. Such a man must continue his manana and nididhyasana so
that all the obstacles may be destroyed. He will then be able to
remain permanently in the Real State.
D.: What is the difference between a man who makes no attempts and
remains an ajnani, and another who gains a glimpse and returns
to ajnana?
M.: In the latter case a stimulus is always present to goad him on to
further efforts until the realisation is perfect.
D.: The Srutis say: Sakrit vibhatoyam brahmaloka (This knowledge
of Brahman shines forth once and forever).
M.: They refer to the permanent realisation and not to the glimpse.
D.: How is it possible that a man forgets his very experience and falls
back into ignorance?

Sri Bhagavan illustrated it with the following story:
There was a king who treated his subjects well. One of his ministers
gained his confidence and misused the influence. All the other
ministers and officers were adversely affected and they hit upon a
plan to get rid of him. They instructed the guards not to let the man
enter the palace. The king noted his absence and enquired after him.
He was informed that the man was taken ill and could not therefore
come to the palace. The king deputed his physician to attend on the
minister. False reports were conveyed to the king that the minister
was sometimes improving and at other times collapsing. The king
desired to see the patient. But the pandits said that such an action
was against dharma. Later the minister was reported to have died.
The king was very sorry when he heard the news.
The arrogant minister was kept informed of all the happenings by
spies of his own. He tried to foil the other ministers. He waited for
the king to come out of the palace so that he might report himself to
the king. On one occasion he climbed up a tree, hid himself among
the branches and awaited the king. The king came out that night
in the palanquin and the man in hiding jumped down in front of
the palanquin and shouted his identity. The companion of the king
was equally resourceful. He at once took out a handful of sacred
ashes (vibhuti) from his pocket and scattered it in the air so that
the king was obliged to close his eyes. The companion shouted
victory (‘jai’) to the king and ordered the band to play so that the
other man’s shout was drowned in the noise. He also ordered the
palanquin-bearers to move fast and he himself sang incantations to
keep off evil spirits. The king was thus left under the impression
that the dead man’s ghost was playing pranks with him.
The disappointed man became desperate and retired into the forest
for tapasya (austerities). After a long time the king happened to
go hunting. He came across the former minister seated in deep
contemplation. But he hastened away from the spot lest the ghost
should molest him.
The moral of the story is that even though the man was seen in flesh
and blood, yet the wrong notion that he was a ghost prevented right
values being taken. So it is with a forced realisation of the Self.

Talk 563.
22nd October, 1938
A group of people came on a visit to Sri Bhagavan. One of them
asked: “How can I keep my mind aright?”
M.: A refractory bull is lured to the stall by means of grass. Similarly
the mind must be lured by good thoughts.
D.: But it does not remain steady.
M.: The bull accustomed to stray takes delight in going astray.
However he must be lured with luscious grass to the stall. Even
so he will continue to trespass into the neighbour’s fields. He must
gradually be made to realise that the same kind of good grass can
be had in his own place. After a time he will remain in the stall
without straying. Later a time will come when, even if driven
out of the stall, he will return to the stall without going into the
neighbouring fields. So also the mind must be trained to take to
right ways. It will gradually grow accustomed to good ways and
will not return to wrong ways.
D.: What are the good ways to be shown to the mind?
M.: Thought of God.

23rd to 26th October, 1938
Talk 564.
Pandit Bala Kak Dhar, a jagirdar from Kashmir, had come all the way
from Srinagar to have darshan of Sri Bhagavan on Deepavali Day. He
gave a bundle of papers to Sri Bhagavan containing an account of his life
and position. His talks with Sri Bhagavan were all of them personal.
One of his questions was: “Now that I have had the darshan of Sri
Bhagavan and it is enough for me, may I throw away all the charms,
tantras and pujas into the river?”
M.: Daily puja as prescribed in the Dharma sastras is always good. It is
for the purification of the mind. Even if one feels oneself too advanced
to need such puja, still it must be performed for the sake of others. Such
action will be an example to one’s children and other dependents.

Talk 565.
A gentleman from Mysore asked: How is the mind to be kept in the
right way?
M.: By practice. Give it good thoughts. The mind must be trained in
good ways.
D.: But it is not steady.
M.: The Bhagavad Gita says: Sanaissanairuparamet (The mind must
gradually be brought to a standstill); Atma samstham manah krtva
(making the mind inhere in the Self); Abhyasa-vairagyabhyam (by
practice and dispassion).
Practice is necessary. Progress will be slow.
D.: What is the Self referred to in Atma samstham (fixing it in
the Self)?
M.: Do you not know your Self? You certainly exist. Or do you deny
your existence? The question may arise “Who is this Self”, only if
you do not exist, but you cannot ask anything unless you exist at
the same time. Your question shows that you exist. Find out who
you are. That is all.
D.: I have read many books. But my mind does not turn to the Self.
M.: Because the Self is not in the books; but it is in you. Reading
books makes one learned. That is its purpose and it is fulfilled.
D.: What is Atma sakshatkara (Self-Realisation)?
M.: You are the Atma (Self) and that sakshat (here and now) also.
Where is the place for kara (accomplishment) in it? This question
shows that you think you are the non-Self. Or you think that there
are two selves, the one to realise the other. It is absurd.
That you identify yourself with the gross body lies at the root of
this question. Well, this question arises now. Did it arise in your
sleep? Did you not exist then? Certainly you did exist in sleep.
What is the difference between these two states that the question
should arise now but not in sleep? Now you think that you are the
body. You see things around you and you want to see the Self in
a similar manner. Such is the force of habit. The senses are mere
instruments of perception. You are the seer. Remain as the seer only.
What else is there to see? Such is the state in deep sleep.

Therefore this question does not arise then.
Atma sakshatkara (Self-Realisation) is thus only anatma nirasana
(giving up the non-Self).
D.: Is there only one Self or are there more selves?
M.: This is again due to confusion; you identify the body with the
Self. You think: “Here I am; here he is, there is another; and so
on”. You find many bodies and think they are so many selves.
But did you ask in your sleep “I am sleeping here, how many are
there who are awake?” Does any question arise, for the matter of
that? Why does it not arise? Because you are only one and there
are not many.
D.: What is my tattva (truth)?
M.: You are yourself the tattva. Is there a different one to know the
tattva of another? How can you exist apart from the tattva? The
very fact of your existence makes you ask this question. Your very
existence is the tattva. Give up the habiliments of the tattva and
remain in your essential nature. All the Scriptures tell you only not
to waste your efforts in non-truth - non-tattva. Give up the non-tattva.
Then tattva remains always shining pure and single.
D.: I want to know my tattva and my duties.
M.: Know your tattva first and then you may ask what your duties
are. You must exist in order to know and do your duty. Realise your
existence and then enquire of your duties.

Talk 566.
26th October, 1938
There is a Tamil paper Arya Dharmam. An article on Vairagyam
appeared in it. Sri Bhagavan read it out in answer to a question. The
article was briefly as follows:
vairagya = vi + raga = vigataraga (non-attachment).
Vairagya is possible only for the wise. However, it is often misapplied
by the common folk. For instance, a man often says “I have determined
not to go to cinema shows.” He calls it vairagya. Such wrong
interpretation of the words and old sayings are not uncommon.

Again we often hear, “Dog seen, stone is not seen; stone seen, dog is
not seen.” It is ordinarily understood to mean that one cannot find a
brickbat to throw at a stray dog. But this popular saying has a much
deeper significance. It is based on a story:
A certain wealthy man’s house was closely guarded. It had also a
ferocious dog chained to a pillar at the gate. The dog and the chain
were however very skilful pieces of art. They were sculptured in stone
but appeared life-like. A pedestrian on the road once took fright at the
sight of the ferocious animal and hurt himself in his attempt to dodge
it. A kindly neighbour took pity on him and showed him that it was not
a living dog. When the man passed by it the next time he admired the
skill of the sculptor and forgot his old experience. Thus when he found
it to be a dog, he could not see the stone of which it was made; and
again when he found it a piece of sculpture he did not see any dog to
hurt him. Hence the proverb. Compare it with ‘The elephant hides the
wood and the wood hides the elephant.’ Here it is a wooden elephant.
Atma is always Sat-Chit-Ananda. Of these, the first two are
experienced in all the states, whereas the last one is said to be
experienced in sleep only.
The question arises how the true nature of the Self can be lost in
the waking and dream states. It is, really speaking, not lost. In sleep
there is no mind and the Self shines as Itself, whereas in the other
two states what shines forth is the reflected light of the Self. Ananda
is felt after the cessation of thoughts in sleep. It is also manifest on
other occasions as love, joy, etc., priya, moda and pramoda. But they
are all chitta vrittis (modes of mind).
When a man is walking in the street his mind is full of fleeting
thoughts. Suppose he passes a bazaar where some fine mangoes are
for sale. He likes the mangoes and purchases them. He is next anxious
to taste them. So he hastens home and eats them and feels happy.
When the fleeting thoughts give way to the pleasure at the sight of
mangoes, it is priya, when he gets them as his own, the pleasure is
moda; lastly, when he eats them, the pleasure is pramoda.
All the three kinds of pleasure are owing to the disappearance of
other thoughts.

3rd to 6th November, 1938
Talk 567.
Sri Bhagavan explained to Mr. MacIver the first few stanzas of Sad
Vidya as follows:
1. The first stanza is the auspicious beginning. Why should the subject-matter
of the piece be brought in here? Can knowledge be other than
Being? Being is the core - the Heart. How then is the Supreme Being
to be contemplated and glorified? Only to remain as the Pure Self
is the auspicious beginning. This speaks of attributeless Brahman
according to the jnana marga (method of knowledge).
2. The second stanza is in praise of God with attributes. In the
foregoing, to be as one Self is mentioned; in the present one, surrender
to the Lord of all.
Furthermore the second indicates (1) the fit reader (2) the subject-matter
(3) the relationship and (4) the fruit. The fit reader is the one
who is competent for it. Competence consists in non-attachment to
the world and desire to be liberated.
All know that they must die some time or other; but they do not think
deeply of the matter. All have a fear of death: such fear is momentary.
Why fear death? Because of the ‘I-am-the-body’ idea. All are fully
aware of the death of the body and its cremation. That the body is lost
in death is well-known. Owing to the I-am-the-body notion, death
is feared as being the loss of Oneself. Birth and death pertain to the
body only; but they are superimposed on the Self, giving rise to the
delusion that birth and death relate to the Self.
In the effort to overcome birth and death man looks up to the Supreme
Being to save him. Thus are born faith and devotion to the Lord. How
to worship Him? The creature is powerless and the Creator is All-powerful.
How to approach Him? To entrust oneself to His care is the
only thing left for him; total surrender is the only way. Therefore he
surrenders himself to God. Surrender consists in giving up oneself and
one’s possessions to the Lord of Mercy. Then what is left over for the
man? Nothing - neither himself nor his possessions. The body liable
to be born and to die having been made over to the Lord, the man need

no longer worry about it. Then birth and death cannot strike terror. The
cause of fear was the body; it is no longer his; why should he fear now?
Or where is the identity of the individual to be frightened?
Thus the Self is realised and Bliss results. This is then the subject-matter:
freedom from misery and gain of Happiness. This is the highest good to be
gained. Surrender is synonymous with Bliss itself. This is the relationship.
Fruit is to reflect on the subject-matter and gain Knowledge which is
ever-present, here and now. The stanza ends with “the immortal ones.”
3. The five senses mean the subtle functions (tanmatras), namely,
hearing, touch, seeing, taste and smell. Variations of these form the
whole universe; they vary according to the three gunas as follows:
by tamas (dullness) the gross elements;
by rajas (activity) the instruments for knowing objects;
by sattva (clearness) the different kinds of knowledge of the senses;
also:
by tamas - the gross objects i.e., the world;
by rajas - the vital airs and the karmendriyas
by sattva - the sense organs of perception (jnanendriyas).
Karmendriyas are organs of holding, walking, speech, evacuation
and reproduction.
Now consider the ringing of the bell; the sound is related to hearing;
the bell is the object, the modification of tamoguna. The rajasic
tanmatras, changing as the vibrations of sound, extend round the bell,
then as ether get connected with the ear in order to be felt as sound.
The knowledge recognising it as sound is the sattva tanmatra.
So also the other senses: Touch (vayu) - air tanmatra; form (rupa) - tejas
tanmatra; taste (ap) - water tanmatra; smell (prithvi) - earth tanmatra.
To understand the tanmatras as the subtlest particles of matter is not
right, for it is incomplete. They are only the subtle forms of sound,
touch, sight, taste and smell, which form the whole components of
the universe. Such is the creation of the world.
For want of proper terminology these ideas cannot be rightly expressed
in foreign languages.

4. This stanza says that all are agreed on one point. What is it? The state
beyond duality and non-duality, beyond subject and object, beyond jiva
and God, in short, beyond all differences. It is free from ego. “How to
reach it?” is the question. By giving up the world, it says. Here “the world”
stands for thoughts relating to it. If such thoughts do not arise, the ego
does not rise up. There will be no subject nor object. Such is the state.
Talk 568.
Mr. V. G. Sastri showed a cutting to Sri Bhagavan. It contained some
prophecy of Sri Rama Tirtha that India would reach the full height
of her former glory before 1950 AD
Sri Bhagavan said: Why should we think that India is not already in
the height of her glory? The glory is in your thought.

Talk 569.
7th November, 1938
In reply to Sri K. L. Sarma, Sri Bhagavan spoke about Dakshinamurti
stotra as follows:
I originally intended to write a commentary on it. Mr. Ranganatha Iyer
took away my Tamil version of the stotra and printed it along with
Appalapattu. He later asked me to enlarge it. I had the introduction
ready. He saw it and took it away for printing. I did not proceed with
the work. As for the stotra:
Brahma, the creator, created four sons from his mind. They were Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanathkumara and Sanatsujata. They asked their creator
why they were brought into existence. Brahma said: “I must create the
universe. But I want to go to do tapas for realising the Self. You are
brought forth in order that you may create the universe. That will be
by multiplying yourselves.” They did not like the idea. They wondered
why they should take the trouble on themselves. It is natural for one to
seek the source. They therefore wanted to regain their source and be
happy. So they did not obey the commands of Brahma but left him. They
desired guidance for realisation of the Self. They were the best equipped
individuals for Self-Realisation. Guidance should be only from the
best of Masters. Who could it be but Siva - the yogiraja. Siva appeared
before them sitting under the sacred banyan tree. Being yogiraja should

He practise yoga? He went into samadhi as He sat; He was in Perfect
Repose. Silence prevailed. They saw Him. The effect was immediate.
They fell into samadhi and their doubts were at an end.
Silence is the true upadesa. It is the perfect upadesa. It is suited only
for the most advanced seeker. The others are unable to draw full
inspiration from it. Therefore they require words to explain the Truth.
But Truth is beyond words. It does not admit of explanation. All that
is possible to do is only to indicate It. How is that to be done?
The people are under an illusion. If the spell is removed they will realise
the Truth. They must be told to realise the falsity of the illusion. Then they
will try to escape its snares. Vairagya will result. They will enquire into
the Truth, i.e., seek the Self. That will make them abide as the Self. Sri
Sankara, being the avatar of Siva, was full of compassion for fallen beings.
He wanted all of them to realise their blissful Self. He could not reach them
all with His Silence. So he composed the Dakshinamurti stotra in the form
of a hymn so that people might read it and understand the Truth.
What is the nature of the illusion? All are in the grip of enjoyment,
i.e., bhokta, bhogyam, bhoga. This is due to the wrong notion that
bhogya vastu (the objects) are real. The ego, the world and the creator
are the fundamentals underlying the illusion. If they are known to be
not apart from the Self there will be no more illusion.
The first four stanzas deal with the world. It is shown to be the same
as the Master whose Self is that of the seeker also, or the Master to
whom the seeker surrenders himself. The second four stanzas deal
with the individual whose Self is shown to be the Self of the Master.
The ninth stanza deals with Isvara and the tenth with the siddhi or
Realisation. Such is the scheme of the stotra.
Which is the darpana (mirror) here? A mirror, as we know it, is an
insentient object which reflects light. What corresponds to a mirror in
an individual? The light of the Self-luminous Self is reflected on the
Mahatattva. The reflected light is the mind-ether or the pure mind. This
illumines the vasanas (latencies) of the individual and hence the sense
of ‘I’ and ‘this’ arises.
Again, a superficial reading of the slokas makes one believe that
the bondage, liberation, etc., are all related to the Master i.e., Sri
Dakshinamurti. It is absurd. Surrender to Him is meant.

Talk 570.
A visitor: Nirguna upasana is said to be difficult and risky. He quoted the
verse from Sri Bhagavad Gita, avyaktahi etc. (the manifest, etc.)
M.: What is manifest is considered to be unmanifest and doubt is
created. Can anything be more immediate and intimate than the
Self? Can anything be more plain?
D.: Saguna upasana seems easier.
M.: Do what is easy for you.
Talk 571.
Multiplicity of individuals is a moot point with most persons. A jiva
is only the light reflected on the ego. The person identifies himself
with the ego and argues that there must be more like him. He is not
easily convinced of the absurdity of his position. Does a man who
sees many individuals in his dream persist in believing them to be
real and enquire after them when he wakes up?
This argument does not convince the disputant.
Again, there is the moon. Let anyone look at her from any place at any
time; she is the same moon. Everyone knows it. Now suppose that there
are several receptacles of water reflecting the moon. The images are
all different from one another and from the moon herself. If one of the
receptacles falls to pieces, that reflection disappears. Its disappearance
does not affect the real moon or the other reflections. It is similar with
an individual attaining Liberation. He alone is liberated.
The sectarian of multiplicity makes this his argument against non-duality.
“If the Self is single, if one man is liberated, that means that all souls are
liberated. In practice it is not so. Therefore Advaita is not correct.”
The weakness in the argument is that the reflected light of the Self is
mistaken for the original Light of the Self. The ego, the world and the
individuals are all due to the person’s vasanas. When they perish, that
person’s hallucinations disappear, that is to say one pitcher is broken
and the relative reflection is at an end.
The fact is that the Self is never bound. There can therefore be no
Release for It. All the troubles are for the ego only.

10th November, 1938
A question was asked why it was wrong to say that there is a
multiplicity of jivas. Jivas are certainly many. For a jiva is only the
ego and forms the reflected light of the Self. Multiplicity of selves
may be wrong but not of jivas.
M.: Jiva is called so because he sees the world. A dreamer sees many
jivas in a dream but all of them are not real. The dreamer alone
exists and he sees all. So it is with the individual and the world.
There is the creed of only one Self which is also called the creed of
only one jiva. It says that the jiva is only one who sees the whole
world and the jivas therein.
D.: Then jiva means the Self here.
M.: So it is. But the Self is not a seer. But here he is said to see the
world. So he is differentiated as the Jiva.
Talk 572.
D.: Of what use is the fear of death which is common to all?
M.: True, it is common to all. Such fear serves no useful purpose
because being overpowered by the latent tendencies of the mind
the man dies a natural death. It does not lead him to non-attachment
and he cannot investigate the matter.
D.: How then are you giving the same instruction without distinction
to visitors?
M.: What do I say? The ego in each one must die. Let him reflect
on it. Is there this ego or is there not? By repeated reflection one
becomes more and more fit.

Talk 573.
11th November, 1938
Mr. Ranganatha Ayyar, a devotee of fourteen years’ standing, is on
a visit here. He asked: How long is the interval between one’s death
and reincarnation?
M.: It may be long or short. But a Jnani does not have any such
changes; he merges into the universal Being, so says the
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.

Some say that those who after death pass into the path of light
are not reborn, whereas those who after death take the path of
darkness are reborn after they have enjoyed the fruits of karma
in their subtle bodies.
If one’s merits and demerits are equal, they are directly reborn here.
Merits outweighing demerits, the subtle bodies go to heavens and
are then reborn here; demerits outweighing merits, they go to hells
and are afterwards reborn here.
A yogabrashta is said to fare in the same manner. All these are
described in the sastras. But in fact, there is neither birth nor death.
One remains only as what one really is. This is the only Truth.
Talk 574.
D.: What are asanas (postures or seats)? Are they necessary?
M.: Many asanas with their effects are mentioned in the Yoga sastras.
The seats are the tiger-skin, grass, etc.; the postures are the ‘lotus
posture’, the ‘easy posture’ and so on.
Why all these - only to know oneself? “I am the body; the body
requires a seat; it is the earth,” thinking thus, he seeks seats. But in
sleep did he think of the support or the bed: the bed on the cot and the
cot on the earth? Did he not exist in sleep too? How was he then?
The truth is - Being the Self, the ego rising up, confusing himself
with the body, mistaking the world to be real, differentiating the
objects, covered by the ignorance of the ‘I’-conceit, he thinks wildly
and also looks for seats. He does not understand that he himself is
the Centre of all and thus forms the basis for all.
If questioned he talks of the effects of seats and footwear in terms
of gravitation, magnetism and so on. Without them he imagines
that the power of his austerities will dwindle away.
Wherefrom do they all derive their power? He looks to the effects,
seeks their causes and imagines them to be the power of seats and of
footwear. A stone thrown up falls back to the ground. Why? Owing to
the gravitation, says he. Well - are all these different from his thoughts?
Think and say if the stone, the earth and gravity are different from his
thoughts. They are all in his mind only. He is the Power and the wielder
of it. He is the Centre of all and their support. He is also the Seat.

The seat is meant to make him sit firm. Where and how can he
remain firm except in his own real state? This is the Seat.
Talk 575.
D.: How to conquer desire, anger, etc.?
M.: Desire or lust, anger, etc., give you pain. Why? Because of the ‘I’-conceit;
this ‘I’-conceit is from ignorance; ignorance from differentiation;
differentiation from the notion of the reality of the world and this again
from ‘I-am-the-body’ idea. The last can be only after the rise of the ego.
The ego not arising, the whole chain of mishaps disappears. Therefore
prevent the rise of the ego. This can be done by remaining in your own
real nature; then lust, anger, etc., are conquered.
D.: So then all these have their root in ignorance.
M.: Quite so. Ignorance gives rise to error, error to conceit, etc. What
is ignorance? Can it be of Pure Brahman which is only the Self or
Pure Knowledge? Only let the questioner know his own Self, i.e., be
the Knowledge; this question will not arise. Because of ignorance
he raises the question. Such ignorance is of the questioner and not
of the Self. The sun seen, no darkness persists.
There is hoarded wealth in an iron safe. The man says it is his
own; the safe does not say so. It is the ownership-conceit that is
responsible for the claim.
Nothing is independent of the Self, not even ignorance; for
ignorance is only the power of the Self, remaining there without
affecting It. However it affects the ‘I’-conceit, i.e., the jiva.
Therefore ignorance is of the jiva.
How? The man says, “I do not know myself.” Are there then two
selves - one the subject and the other the object? He cannot admit
it. Is then ignorance at an end for him? No. The rise of the ego is
itself the ignorance and nothing more.
Talk 576.
Sutra Bhashya:—
The sutras are meant to elucidate and establish the meanings of the
texts. The commentaries try to do so by bringing in the opponent’s
views, refuting them and arriving at conclusions after long discussions;
there are also differences of opinion in the same school of thought;

again protagonists and antagonists. Also different schools of thought
interpret the same text in different ways and arrive at different
conclusions, contrary to each other.
How then is the purpose of the sutras served?

Talk 577.
15th November, 1938
Pure Being

Supreme Being (This shines forth)
Pure Mind - Sattva mind - Isvara
Rajas
the ego (Aham)

Tamas
the world (Idam)

All these are Vedantic terminology

Talk 578.
Coming here, some people do not ask about themselves. They ask:
“Does the sage, liberated while alive (Jivanmukta), see the world? Is
he affected by Karma?
What is liberation after being disembodied? Is one liberated only
after being disembodied or even while alive in the body? Should
the body of the sage resolve itself in light or disappear from view
in any other manner? Can he be liberated though the body is left
behind as a corpse?”
Their questions are endless. Why worry oneself in so many ways?
Does liberation consist in knowing these?
Therefore I say to them, “Leave liberation alone. Is there bondage?
Know this. See yourself first and foremost.”
Talk 579.
Avarana (veiling) does not hide the jiva in entirety; he knows that he is;
only he does not know who he is. He sees the world; but not that it is
only Brahman. It is light in darkness (or knowledge in ignorance).

In a cinema show the room is first darkened, artificial light is
introduced; only in this light are the pictures projected.
For differentiation a reflected light is thus necessary. A sleeper dreams,
he is not out of sleep: only in the darkness or ignorance of sleep can
he see the unreal dream objects.
Similarly the darkness of ignorance gives rise to the knowledge of
the perceptions of the world.

Ajnana
Ignorance
Darkness

Avarana
Veiling

This veiling is a characteristic of ignorance; it is not of the Self: it
cannot affect the Self in any manner; it can veil only the jiva.
The ego is insentient: united with the light from the Self, it is
called jiva. But the ego and the light cannot be seen distinct from
each other; they are always united together. The mixed product is
the jiva, the root of all differentiation. All these are spoken of to
satisfy the questioners.

Sahasrara
(cranium)

}

Ether = Jnana

Kantham
(throat)

}

Air = Mind

Hridaya
(Heart)

}

Light = Intellect

Nabhi
(navel)

}

Water = Memory

Mula
(Solar plexus)

}

Earth = The Ego

Such is the representation
of the subtle body. The
senses and other organs
act separately, whereas
the inner organs and the
vital airs can work only in
unison. Therefore the former
are vyashti (individualistic)
and the latter are samashti
(collective).

Avarana (veiling) gives rise to two kinds of veiling.
Avarana
within
veils drik (the seer)
and drisya (the seen)

outside
veils the
Lord’s Creation

‘I-am-the-body idea’

Multiplicity

Jiva is not independent of Isvara; nor ignorance of maya. Only on waking
up from sleep, the man perceives the body and the world, but not in sleep.
On the strength of the present knowledge he understands that he remained
in deep sleep also. Therefore in sleep jiva must be concluded to be in pure
state in which the body and the world are not perceived.
D.: Is not jiva the reflected light, the ‘I-thought’?
M.: He is also a jiva; before it also he is jiva; the one of them is
related to the other as cause and effect. The sleeper jiva cannot be
independent of Isvara. On waking he says “I am the body”. If all
the worlds together form virat, the body is a tiny dot in it. Thus
the body is in and of virat. What belongs to the jiva then? Only the
conceit makes him claim the body as himself but not the others.
He cannot be independent of virat. Similarly,
(1) Isvara
(Causal Cosmic Being) → Prajna (individual being in deep
sleep)
(2) Hiranyagarbha
(Causal Subtle Being) → Taijasa (individual subtle being)
(3) Virat
(Causal gross Being) → Visva (individual gross being)
(4) Maya
(Causal Ignorance adjunct to Isvara) → Ignorance adjunct to
Jiva
(5) Brahman
(Cause) → Jiva (Effect)
They say that all these five groups should be unified. This they call
the unity of the Five. All these are only polemics!

Talk 580.
17th November, 1938
A party from Rajkot came in a bus. They consisted of four chiefs and
four ladies with attendants and a bodyguard. They arrived at 11 a.m.
After lunch in their room, they had a short conversation at 12-45 p.m.
and left at 1-5 p.m.
One of them said: Here is the mother of the Thakore Saheb. We have
come a long distance for the darshan of Sri Maharshi. Will He
kindly give us some instructions?
Sri Bhagavan smiled and answered: Good that they have come such
a long distance for the sake of darshan. It is enough that they have
said it. What is there for me to say? (Lunch bell).

At 12-45 p.m.
D.: Is a Jnani different from a yogi? What is the difference?
M.: Srimad Bhagavad Gita says that a Jnani is the true yogi and also
a true bhakta. Yoga is only a sadhana and jnana is the siddhi.
D.: Is yoga necessary?
M.: It is a sadhana. It will not be necessary after jnana is attained.
All the sadhanas are called yogas, e.g., Karma yoga; Bhakti yoga;
Jnana yoga; Ashtanga yoga. What is yoga? Yoga means ‘union’.
Yoga is possible only when there is ‘viyoga’ (separation). The
person is now under the delusion of viyoga. This delusion must
be removed. The method of removing it is called yoga.
D.: Which method is the best?
M.: It depends upon the temperament of the individual. Every person
is born with the samskaras of past lives. One of the methods will be
found easy for one person and another method for another. There
is no definiteness about it.
D.: How is one to meditate?
M.: What is meditation? It is commonly understood to be concentration
on a single thought. Other thoughts are kept out at that time. The
single thought also must vanish at the right time. Thought-free
consciousness is the goal.
D.: How is the ego to be got rid of?

M.: The ego must be held in order to get rid of it. Hold it first and
the rest will be easy.
D.: How is that to be held?
M.: Do you mean to say that there is one ego to hold another ego or
to eliminate the other? Are there two egos?
D.: How shall I pray to God?
M.: There-must be ‘I’ who prays to God. ‘I’ is certainly immediate
and intimate, whereas God is not thought so. Find out that which
is more intimate and then the other may be ascertained and prayed
to if necessary.

Talk 581.
19th November, 1938
When a child held something to be offered to Sri Bhagavan by the
parents, they cajoled the child to offer it to Sri Bhagavan. The child
did so gladly. Sri Bhagavan remarked: Look at this! When the child
can give a thing away to Jeja it is tyaga. ( Jeja -God). See what
influence Jeja has on children also! Every gift implies unselfishness.
That is the whole content of nishkama Karma (unselfish action). It
means true renunciation. If the giving nature is developed it becomes
tyaga. If anything is willingly given away it is a delight to the giver
and to the receiver. If the same is stolen it is misery to both. Dana,
dharma, nishkama Karma are all tyaga only. When ‘mine’ is given
up it is chitta suddhi (purified mind). When ‘I’ is given up it is jnana.
When the nature to give away is developed it results in jnana.
Again a little later, a young boy came all alone, unescorted by his parents.
He had come from Chengam in a bus. Sri Bhagavan remarked, “The boy
has left his parents to come here. This is also an instance of tyaga.”

21st. 22nd November, 1938
Talk 582.
To an Andhra gentleman Sri Bhagavan said: If one goes on wanting, one’s
wants cannot be fulfilled. Whereas if one remains desireless anything will
be forthcoming. We are not in the wife, children, profession, etc.; but they
are in us; they appear and disappear according to one’s prarabdha.

The mind remaining still is samadhi, no matter whether the world
is perceived or not.
Environment, time and objects are all in me. How can they be
independent of me? They may change, but I remain unchanging,
always the same. The objects can be differentiated by means of
their names and forms, whereas each one’s name is only one and
that is ‘I’. Ask anyone, he says ‘I’ and speaks of himself as ‘I’,
even if He is Isvara. His name too is ‘I’ only.
So also of a locality. As long as I am identified with the body so
long a locality is distinguishable; otherwise not. Am I the body?
Does the body announce itself as ‘I’?
Clearly all these are in me. All these wiped out entirely, the residual
Peace is ‘I’. This is samadhi, this is ‘I’.
Talk 583.
Mr. V. Ganapati Sastri showed Sri Bhagavan a letter from a Spanish lady,
Mercedes De Acosta, saying she would be coming here the next day. Sri
Bhagavan remarked: “See the trouble to so many because I am here.”

23rd November, 1938
REMINISCENCE
Talk 584.
A certain visitor began to pull the pankah. Sri Bhagavan said: “Because it is cold,
they have placed fire by my side. Why should the pankah be pulled?”
Then he continued: “On a cold morning, when I was in Virupaksha
cave, I was sitting in the open. I was feeling cold. People used to
come, see me and go back. A group of Andhra visitors had come. I
did not notice what they were doing. They were behind me. Suddenly
a noise ‘tak’ - and water over my head! I shivered with cold. I looked
back. They had broken a coconut and poured the water on me. They
thought that it was worship. They took me for a stone image.”
Talk 585.
Sri Bhagavan said that this town is peculiar in that there are nine roads
leading to it, not counting the railroad; navadware pure dehe (in the
body - the city of nine gates).

Talk 586.
An Andhra visitor asked: How is one to be quiet? It is so difficult to be so.
Should we practise yoga for it? Or is there any other means for it?
M.: What is not difficult looks difficult. A man is prone to wander
about. He is told to stay quiet at home, but finds it difficult to do
so because he wants to wander about.
D.: Is there any particular upasana which is more efficacious than
others?
M.: All upasanas are equally efficacious. But each one takes easily
to one kind of upasana which suits his previous vasanas.

Talk 587.
24th November, 1938
The Spanish lady and her lady friend have come. They asked: You say
the Heart is on the right. Can you explain how it is so?
Sri Bhagavan handed over the extract from the Psychological Review
of Philadelphia for her to read. He also added. The Heart is the place
wherefrom the ‘I-thought’ arises.
D.: So you mean the spiritual Heart as distinguished from the physical
heart?
M.: Yes. It is explained in Ch. V of Sri Ramana Gita.
D.: Is there any stage when one might feel the Heart?
M.: It is within the experience of everyone. Everyone touches the
right side of his chest when he says ‘I’.
Both the ladies kneeled before Sri Bhagavan one after another and
asked for blessings. Then they left for Pondicherry on their way
to Colombo.

Talk 588.
25th November, 1938
To an Andhra seeker, Sri Bhagavan said: Sannyasa is mentioned for
one who is fit. It consists in renunciation not of material objects but
of attachment to them. Sannyasa can be practised by anyone even at
home. Only one must be fit for it. Again.

A Kutichaka is one who takes sannyasa and lives in a hermitage;
A Bahudaka is one who takes sannyasa and goes to places of
pilgrimage;
A Hamsa is an upasaka sannyasi;
A Paramahamsa is a realised sannyasi.

Talk 589.
27th November, 1938
Somasundara Swami, a long standing devotee, asked: There is akasa in a
mirror and it reflects images. How are these contained in the mirror?
M.: Objects remain in space. Objects and space are together reflected
in the mirror. Just as the things are found in space, so they are in
the reflection also. The mirror is itself thin. How can these objects
be contained in its compass?
D.: How does the akasa in a pot illustrate this point?
M.: There is no reflection in the akasa of the pot. The reflection is only in
the water in it. Keeping several pots filled with water in a tank, the akasa
is reflected equally in the water in each of the pots and in the water of the
tank. Similarly the whole universe is reflected in each individual.
D.: The mouths of the pots must be above the surface of the water
in the tank.
M.: Yes, it must be so. Otherwise can the pots be recognised if sunk
in the tank?
D.: How does the reflection take place there?
M.: Pure ether cannot take reflections; only the ether of water can do
so. Glass cannot reflect objects; only a plate of glass with an opaque
lining on its back can reflect the objects in front of it. Similarly Pure
Knowledge does not contain objects in it nor reflect objects. Only
with the limiting adjunct, the mind, it reflects the world.
Neither in samadhi nor in deep sleep does the world remain. There
cannot be illusion either in bright light or in total darkness. Only
in dim light a rope seems a snake. Similarly Pure Consciousness
remains light only; it is pure knowledge. The mind rising from it
is deluded that the objects remain apart.
D.: So then the mind is the mirror.

M.: Mind - mind what is it? It is a mixture of Chit (intelligence) and
sankalpas (thoughts). Therefore it forms all these - the mirror, light,
darkness and the reflections.
D.: But I do not see it.
M.: Chidakasa (chit-ether) is Pure Knowledge only, It is the source
of mind. Just at the moment of rising up, the mind is only light;
only afterwards the thought “I am this” rises up; this ‘I-thought’
forms the jiva and the world.
The first light is the pure mind, the mind ether or Isvara. Its modes
manifest as objects. Because it contains all these objects within
itself it is called the mind-ether. Why ether? Like ether containing
objects it contains the thoughts, therefore it is the mind-ether.
Again, just as the physical ether though accommodating all the gross objects
(the whole universe) is itself the content of the mind-ether, so also the latter
is itself the content of Chit-ether. The last one is Chit Itself. There are no
things contained in it. It remains as Pure Knowledge only.
D.: Why call it ether? Physical ether is not sentient.
M.: Ether denotes not only the insentient physical ether but also Pure
Knowledge. Knowledge does not consist in knowing objects: this is
relative knowledge. But Knowledge in its purity remains all alone,
One, unique, transcendent Light!
D.: Well - should we be imagining it in our meditation?
M.: Why imagine? We can think of another only if we are independent
of it, whereas here we cannot remain independent of this Pure
Knowledge. Rather, only IT is! How can It be imagined to be so
and so or such and such?
D.: How are we to proceed?
M.: Only get rid of the non-self.
D.: It looks all right now; but later it is all forgotten.
M.: Your forgetfulness implies knowledge, for you know you forgot;
otherwise how can you speak of forgetting it? So forgetfulness also
is Chit-akasa (Chit-ether) only.
D.: How then is it not clear to me?
M.: Chit is knowledge pure and simple. The mind proceeds from it;
the mind is made up of thoughts. Darkness or ignorance interposing.

Pure Knowledge seems different from what It really is; the same
is seen as ‘I’ and the ‘world’ which are full of desire, attachment,
hatred, etc. Therefore desire, etc., are said to veil the Reality.
D.: How to be rid of thoughts? Is it as said in the Atma-Vidya - the
eye of the mental eye, etc.?
M.: There the mind stands for ether, Being (sat); and the eye for
knowledge (chit); both sat and chit together form the universe.
D.: How to realise the same?
M.: As pointed out in the Atma Vidya “being the eye of the mental eye,
the ether of the mental ether.....”, meaning, the Knowledge behind
the relative knowledge, the Chit-Ether containing the mental ether,
remains as the Only One always shining bright.
D.: Still I do not understand. How shall I realise it?
M.: It is also said, “Remain free from thoughts,” and “It is realised
only in the mind drawn within.” Therefore, the mind made free
from thoughts, and merged in the Heart. is Chit Itself.
D.: Is the aforesaid mental ether Isvara or Hiranyagarbha?
M.: Can the latter remain independent of the former? The same is
Isvara and Hiranyagarbha.
D.: How do they differ from each other?
M.: The Immanent Being is called Isvara.
D.: Is not the Immanent Being Chit-akasa only?
M.: Immanence can only be with Maya. It is the Knowledge of Being
along with Maya; from this subtle conceit Hiranyagarbha; from
the latter the gross conceit virat. Chit-atma is Pure Being only.

Talk 590.
13th December, 1938
Two ladies, one Swiss and the other French, visited Maharshi. The
younger of the ladies asked several questions, of which the most important
was: “Brahman is the same as jiva. If the jiva be under illusion it amounts
to saying that Brahman is under illusion. How is that possible?”
M.: If Brahman be under illusion and wants disillusionment let Him
raise the question.

Talk 591.
14th December, 1938
D.: Seekers who are in immediate proximity of the Master can get
grace by darsana, sparsana, etc. (look, touch, etc.). But how does
one get the same grace when the person is at a distance?
M.: By yoga drishti (yogic look).
Mr. Chopra, a Punjabi employed in Singapore, is on a visit here
and raised a few questions.
D.: What is the efficacy of the name?
Sri Bhagavan read out the extract from the Vision. It was a
translation of Namdev’s stanzas.
D.: How does the name help Realisation?
M.: The original name is always going on spontaneously without any
effort on the part of the individual. That name is aham - ‘I’. But
when it becomes manifest it manifests as ahamkara - the ego. The
oral repetition of nama leads one to mental repetition which finally
resolves itself into the eternal vibration.
D.: But these are all mental or physical.
M.: The mind or the mouth cannot act without the Self. Tukaram, the
great Maharashtra Saint, used to remain in samadhi in the day and
sing and dance at night with large crowds of people. He always
used to utter the name of Sri Rama.
Once he was answering calls of nature and also saying “Ram,
Ram”. An orthodox priest was shocked at the unholy mention of
the sacred name and so reprimanded him and ordered him to be
silent when he answered calls of nature.
Tukaram said, “All right!” and remained mute. But at once
there arose the name of Rama from every pore of Tukaram and
the priest was horrified by the din. He then prayed to Tukaram
“Restrictions are only for the common people and not for saints
like you.”
D.: It is said that Sri Ramakrishna saw life in the image of Kali which
he worshipped. Can it be true?

M.: The life was perceptible to Sri Ramakrishna and not to all. The
vital force was due to himself. It was his own vital force which
manifested as if it were outside and drew him in. Were the image
full of life it must have been found so by all. But everything is full
of life. That is the fact. Many devotees have had experiences similar
to those of Sri Ramakrishna.
D.: How can there be life in stone? It is unconscious.
M.: The whole universe is full of life. You say the stone is unconscious.
It is your self-consciousness which now speaks of unconsciousness.
When a person wants to see if there is an article in a dark room
he takes a lamp to look for it. The light is useful for detecting the
presence and the absence of the thing. Consciousness is necessary
for discovering if a thing is conscious or not. If a man remains in
a dark room one need not take a lamp to find him. If called, he
answers. He does not require a lamp to announce his presence.
Consciousness is thus self-shining.
Now you say you were unconscious in sleep and self-conscious in the
wakeful state. Which is the Reality? The Reality must be continuous
and eternal. Neither the unconsciousness nor the self-consciousness of
the present is the Reality. But you admit your existence all through. The
pure Being is the reality. The others are mere associations. The pure
Being cannot be otherwise than consciousness. Otherwise you cannot
say that you exist. Therefore consciousness is the reality. When that
consciousness is associated with upadhis you speak of self-consciousness,
unconsciousness, sub-consciousness, super-consciousness, human-consciousness,
dog-consciousness, tree-consciousness and so on. The
unaltering common factor in all of them is consciousness.
Therefore the stone is as much unconscious as you are in sleep. Is
that totally devoid of consciousness?
D.: But a dog-consciousness is different from my consciousness. I
cannot read the Bible to the dog. The tree again does not move
whereas I move and act.
M.: Call the tree a standing man; and call the man a moving tree.
An American gentleman who also took part in the conversation would
not allow Sri Bhagavan to explain and so it stopped here.

Talk 592.
The Punjabi gentleman referred to the popular belief of a worm being
metamorphosed to a wasp (bhramarakita nyaya) which Sri Bhagavan
had mentioned to the ladies in the course of conversation yesterday.
Sri Bhagavan recalled some interesting reminiscences:
1. “I had previously heard of this bhramarakita nyaya. After I came to
Tiruvannamalai, when I was staying in Gurumoortham, I noticed a red
wasp construct a hive in which it placed five or six grubs and then flew
away. My curiosity was roused and I wanted to test the truth of the oft-quoted nyaya.
I waited some days, maybe ten days. I then tapped the
hive. It broke and there I found that all the five or six grubs had united
together and taken the shape of a wasp, but it was white.
2. Later when I was in Virupaksha Cave, I saw a red wasp construct
five or six hives in each of which it placed five or six grubs and flew
away. After about ten days, a black beetle, smaller than the wasp,
buzzed round the hives and closed each of then, with a little black
mud and flew away. I was wondering at the intrusion of the beetle
on the hive of the wasp. I waited a few days and then gently opened
one of the hives. Five or six black bodies came out and each of them
was a black beetle. I thought it strange.
3. Again when I was in Pachyamman Temple, I saw a red wasp
constructing five or six hives on a pillar in the temple. It placed
five or six grubs in each of them and buzzed away. I watched it for
several days. The wasp did not return. There was no black beetle also.
After about fifteen days, I opened one of the hives. All the grubs had
united into a white mass of wasp-like form. It dropped down and was
stunned by the fall. After a few minutes, it began to crawl. Its colour
was gradually changing. In a short time, there were two little specks
on its sides which grew into wings as I watched and the full-grown
wasp flew away from the ground.
4. When I was in the Mango-Tree Cave I noticed a caterpillar-like worm
crawl up a wall. It stopped in one place and fixed two spots which it
later connected up with a thin filament from its body. It held the filament
with its mouth and rested its tail end on the wall. It remained so several
days. I was watching it. It shrivelled up in course of time. I wondered if

there was life in it. So I gently tickled it with a thin stalk. There was no
life within. I left it there. But in a few days more I found that there was
only a thin dry skin left behind and the inner thing had flown away.
5. I had also seen the flies carrying tiny grubs on their legs which they
deposited on offal. The grubs later flew away as flies.”
D.: They may be eggs laid by the flies.
M.: But they move and struggle and then shape themselves as flies.
Talk 593.
Sri Bhagavan mentioned another interesting reminiscence. “When I
was a boy I had seen the fishermen divert water from its main course
and keep a pot through which the diverted water flowed. The artificial
way was spread with tobacco stems. Strangely enough the larger fishes
always took the new way and fell into the pot. The fishermen who
were simply sitting quiet used to take the fish out from the pot and
throw them into their baskets. I thought at the time it was strange.
Later, when I was staying here I heard some man recite a piece from
Thayumanavar which mentioned the same trick of the fishermen.”

Talk 594.
15th December, 1938
The Spanish lady, Madam Mercedes De Acorta, has written a letter to
Mr. Hague, the American mining engineer who is here as a temporary
resident for the last two months. She has raised a few questions there:
“If the individual Self merges into the universal Self, how can one
pray to God for the uplift of humanity?” The question seems to be
common among the thinkers of the West.
Sri Bhagavan said: They pray to God and finish with “Thy Will be
done!” If His Will be done why do they pray at all? It is true that the
Divine Will prevails at all times and under all circumstances. The
individuals cannot act of their own accord. Recognise the force of
the Divine Will and keep quiet. Each one is looked after by God.
He has created all. You are one among 2,000 millions. When He
looks after so many will He omit you? Even common sense dictates
that one should abide by His Will.

Again there is no need to let Him know your needs. He knows them
Himself and will look after them.
Still more, why do you pray? Because you are helpless yourself
and you want the Higher Power to help you. Well, does not your
Creator and Protector know your weakness? Should you parade
your weakness in order to make Him know it?
D.: But God helps those who help themselves.
M.: Certainly. Help yourself and that is itself according to God’s Will.
Every action is prompted by Him only. As for prayer for the sake
of others, it looks so unselfish on the surface of it. But analyse
the feeling and you will detect selfishness there also. You desire
others’ happiness so that you may be happy. Or you want the credit
for having interceded on others’ behalf. God does not require an
intermediary. Mind your business and all will be well.
D.: Does not God work His Will through some chosen person?
M.: God is in all and works through all. But His presence is better
recognised in purified minds. The pure ones reflect God’s actions
more clearly than the impure minds. Therefore people say that they
are the chosen ones. But the ‘chosen’ man does not himself say so.
If he thinks that he is the intermediary then it is clear that he retains
his individuality and that there is no complete surrender.
D.: Are not the Brahmins considered to be the priests or intermediaries
between God and others?
M.: Yes. But who is a Brahmin? A Brahmin is one who has realised
Brahman. Such a one has no sense of individuality in him. He
cannot think that he acts as an intermediary.
Again, as for prayer, a realised man does not see others as different
from oneself. How can he pray at all, and to whom and for what?
His very presence is the consummation of happiness for all. So long
as you think that there are others different from you, you pray for
them. But the sense of separateness is ignorance. This ignorance
is again the cause of feeling helplessness. You know that you are
weak and helpless. How then can you help others? If you say, “By
prayer to God”, God knows His business and does not require your
intercession for others.

Help yourself so that you may become strong. That is done by
complete surrender. That means you offer yourself to Him. So you
cannot retain your individuality after surrender. You then abide by
His Will. Thus Silence is the Highest of all achievements.
Silence is the ocean in which all the rivers of all the religions
discharge themselves. So says Thayumanavar. He also adds that
the Vedic religion is the only one which combines both philosophy
and religion.

Talk 595.
16th December, 1938
The two lady visitors returned in the morning and the younger one asked:
“Is the experience of the Highest State the same to all? Or is there
any difference?”
M.: The Highest State is the same and the experience is also the same.
D.: But I find some difference in the interpretations put on the Highest
Truth.
M.: The interpretations are made with the mind. The minds are
different and so the interpretations are different.
D.: I mean to ask if the seers express themselves differently?
M.: The expressions may differ according to the nature of the seekers.
They are meant to guide the seekers.
One seer speaks in the terms of Christianity, another in those of Islam,
a third of Buddhism, etc. Is that due to their upbringing?
M.: Whatever may be their upbringing, their experience is the same.
But the modes of expression differ according to circumstances.
Talk 596.
A visitor asked: Sri Bhagavan said last night that God is guiding us.
Then why should we make an effort to do anything?
M.: Who asks you to do so? If there was that faith in the guidance of
God this question would not have arisen.
D.: The fact is that God guides us. Then what is the use of these
instructions to people?

M.: They are for those who seek instructions. If you are firm in your
belief in the guidance of God, stick to it, and do not concern yourself
with what happens around you.
Furthermore, there may be happiness or misery. Be equally
indifferent to both and abide in the faith of God. That will be so
only when one’s faith is strong that God looks after all of us.
Mr. Chopra asked: “How shall I secure that firm faith?”
M.: Exactly. It is for such as these who want instructions. There are
persons who seek freedom from misery. They are told that God
guides all and so there need not be any concern about what happens.
If they are of the best type they at once believe it and firmly abide
by faith in God.
But there are others who are not so easily convinced of the truth of
the bare statement. They ask: “Who is God? What is His nature?
Where is He? How can He be realised?” and so on.
In order to satisfy them intellectual discussion is found necessary.
Statements are made, their pros and cons are argued, and the truth
is thus made clear to the intellect.
When the matter is understood intellectually the earnest seeker
begins to apply it practically. He argues at every moment, “For
whom are these thoughts? Who am I?” and so forth, until he is
well-established in the conviction that a Higher Power guides us.
That is firmness of faith. Then all his doubts are cleared and he
needs no further instructions.
D.: We also have faith in God.
M.: If it had been firm no questions would have arisen. The person
will remain perfectly happy in his Faith in the Omnipotent.
D.: Is the enquiry into the Self the same as the above mentioned faith?
M.: The enquiry into the Self is inclusive of all, faith, devotion, jnana,
yoga and all.
D.: A man sometimes finds that the physical body does not permit
steady meditation. Should he practise yoga for training the body
for the purpose?

M.: It is according to one’s samskaras (predispositions). One man
will practise hatha yoga for curing his bodily ills; another man
will trust to God to cure them; a third man will use his will-power
for it and a fourth man may be totally indifferent to them. But all
of them will persist in meditation. The quest for the Self is the
essential factor and all the rest are mere accessories.
A man may have mastered the Vedanta philosophy and yet remain
unable to control his thoughts. He may have a predisposition
(purva samskara) which takes him to practise hatha yoga. He
will believe that the mind can be controlled only by yoga and so
he will practise it.
D.: What is most suitable for gaining facilities for steady dhyana?
M.: It depends on one’s samskara. One may find hatha yoga suitable
and another man nama japa, and so on. The essential point is the
atma-vichara - enquiry into the Self.
D.: Is it enough if I spend some time in the mornings and some time
in the evenings for this atma-vichara? Or should I do it always
- say, even when I am writing or walking?
M.: Now what is your real nature? Is it writing, walking, or being? The
one unalterable reality is Being. Until you realise that state of pure
being you should pursue the enquiry. If once you are established
in it there will be no further worry.
No one will enquire into the source of thoughts unless thoughts
arise. So long as you think “I am walking,” “I am writing,” enquire
who does it.
These actions will however go on when one is firmly established
in the Self. Does a man always say, “I am a man, I am a man, I am
a man,” every moment of his life? He does not say so and yet all
his actions are going on.
D.: Is an intellectual understanding of the Truth necessary?
M.: Yes. Otherwise why does not the person realise God or the Self
at once, i.e., as soon as he is told that God is all or the Self is
all? That shows some wavering on his part. He must argue with
himself and gradually convince himself of the Truth before his
faith becomes firm.

Talk 597.
20th December, 1938
A Swiss lady, Mrs. J. C. S. Hick-Riddingh, asked:
“Does Self-Realisation imply occult powers also?”
M.: The Self is the most intimate and eternal Being whereas the siddhis are
foreign. The one requires effort to acquire and the other does not.
The powers are sought by the mind which must be kept alert
whereas the Self is realised when the mind is destroyed. The
powers manifest only when there is the ego. The ego makes
you aware of others and in its absence there are no others to be
seen. The Self is beyond the ego and is realised after the ego is
eliminated. The elimination of the ego makes one unaware of
others. How can the question of others arise and where is the use
of occult powers for a Self-Realised Being?
Self-Realisation may be accompanied by occult powers or it may
not be. If the person had sought such powers before Realisation,
he may get the powers after Realisation. There are others who had
not sought such powers and had attempted only Self-Realisation.
They do not manifest such powers.
These powers may also be sought and gained even after Self-Realisation.
But then they are used for a definite purpose, i.e. the
benefit of others as in the case of Chudala.
Sikhidhvaja was a pious king. His spouse was Chudala. They
received instructions from a sage. The king, being busy with
the administration of his kingdom, could not put the instructions
into practice, whereas Chudala put them into practice and gained
Self-Realisation. Consequently she appeared more charming than
before. The king was struck by her growing charm and asked her
about it. She said that all charm was due to the Self and he was
only noting the charm of Self-Realisation in her. He said that she
was silly. There were great tapasvis who could not realise the Self
even after long periods of tapas and what about a silly woman who
was all along in the family and in the worldly life?
However, Chudala was not offended because she was firm in the
Self and only wished that her husband should realise the Self and

be happy. She then thought that unless she could prove her worth by
manifesting some extraordinary powers he could not be convinced
and she began to seek occult powers and gained them. But she did
not betray them just then. Constant association with her made the
king dispassionate. He began to dislike the worldly life and desired
to retire into the forest for performing tapasya. So he told his wife
that he wanted to leave the world for the forest. She was delighted
at the development, but pretended to be very much concerned with
his unkind decision. He hesitated out of consideration for her. In
the meantime, his dispassion gained in force and he decided to
leave home even without her consent.
When the queen was sleeping one night he suddenly left the palace
by stealth and retired into the forest. He was seeking some solitary
spot where he could perform his tapas. When the queen woke up she
did not find her husband and immediately found out by her occult
powers what had really happened. She rejoiced in her husband’s
determination. She called the ministers and said that the king had
gone on some important business and that the administration should
be carried on as efficiently as ever. She herself administered the
state in the absence of the king.
Eighteen years passed. She then knew that the king was fit for
Self-Realisation. So she appeared to him disguised as Kumbha and
so on. He then realised the Self and returned to rule the kingdom
with the queen.
The point is that occult powers are sought and gained for the
benefit of others by Self-Realised persons also. But the sages are
not deluded by the possession of such powers.
D.: Does the sage use occult powers for making others realise the Self
or is the mere fact of his Self-Realisation enough for it?
M.: The force of his Self-Realisation is far more powerful than the
use of all other powers.
Inasmuch as there is no ego in him, there are not others for him.
What is the highest benefit that can be conferred on others? It is
happiness. Happiness is born of Peace. Peace can reign only when
there is no disturbance. Disturbance is due to thoughts which arise
in the mind. When the mind itself is absent there will be perfect

Peace. Unless a person had annihilated his mind he cannot gain
peace and be happy. Unless he himself is happy he cannot bestow
happiness on others.
When there is no mind he cannot be aware of others. So the mere fact
of his Self-Realisation is itself enough to make all others happy.
D.: Can samadhi come and go?
M.: What is samadhi? Samadhi is one’s essential nature. How then
can it come or go?
If you do not realise your essential nature, your sight remains
obstructed. What is the obstruction? Find it and remove it. So one’s
efforts are meant only for the removal of obstructions which hide
the true vision. The real nature remains the same. When once it is
realised it is permanent.
D.: But Mr. Brunton says that he had one hour’s samadhi. Therefore
I asked the question.
M.: A practiser gains peace of mind and is happy. That peace is
the result of his efforts. But the real state must be effortless.
The effortless samadhi is the true one and the perfect state. It is
permanent. The efforts are spasmodic and so also their results.
When the real, effortless, permanent, happy nature is realised it
will be found to be not inconsistent with the ordinary activities of
life. The samadhi reached after efforts looks like abstraction from
the external activities. A person might be so abstracted or live
freely among people without detriment to his Peace and Happiness
because that is his true nature or the Self.

Talk 598.
21st December, 1938
Sri Bhagavan shows great humour at times: He read Upamanya Bhakta
Vilas which contains a passage where Arunachalesvara is said to have
robbed Tirujnanasambandar and his group of followers of all their
possessions by His bhutaganas disguised as dacoits. Sri Bhagavan
remarked: “Siva Himself was waylaid in Tiruvudal Utsava and He
practised the same trick on His devotees. Can it be so?”

Talk 599.
A saying of Laotze from Tao Teh Ch’ing was read out in the hall: “By
his non-action the sage governs all.”
Sri Bhagavan remarked: Non-action is unceasing activity. The sage
is characterised by eternal and intense activity. His stillness is like
the apparent stillness of a fast rotating top (gyroscope). Its very speed
cannot be followed by the eye and so it appears to be still. Yet it is
rotating. So is the apparent inaction of the sage.
This must be explained because the people generally mistake stillness
to be inertness. It is not so.

Talk 600.
24th December, 1938
A young man asked in broken Tamil:
How long will it be before Self-Realisation?
M.: First know what Self means and also what Realisation means:
then you will know all.
D.: The mind must realise in the Heart.
M.: Be it so. What is mind?
D.: Mind, Heart are all avatars of Perumal (Vaishnavite term for
incarnate God).
M.: If so no need to worry ourselves.
D.: On this basis how can we realise?
M.: Surrender the mind to Perumal (God). His avatar cannot remain
independent of Him. Render unto Him what is His and be happy.
D.: How to do so?
M.: How is the mind known to us? Owing to its activities, namely,
thoughts. Whenever thoughts arise remember they are all modes
of Perumal and they cannot be otherwise, this is enough; this is
the surrender of the mind.
Can anything exist independent of Perumal? All is Perumal alone.
He acts through all. Why worry ourselves?

Talk 601.
27th December, 1938
G. V. Subbaramiah, an Andhra devotee, mentioned something about time.
M.: What is time? It posits a state, one’s recognition of it, and also the
changes which affect it. The interval between two states is called
time. A state cannot come into being unless the mind calls it into
existence. The mind must be held by the Self. If the mind is not
made use of there is no concept of time. Time and space are in the
mind but one’s true state lies beyond the mind. The question of time
does not arise at all to the one established in one’s true nature.
Mr. Narayana Iyer: Sri Bhagavan’s words are so pleasing to hear
but their import is beyond our comprehension. That seems to be
far too much for us even to hope to realise.
G. V. S.: Our grasp is only intellectual. If Sri Bhagavan be pleased
to direct us with a few instructions we shall be highly benefited.
M.: He who instructs an ardent seeker to do this or that is not a true
master. The seeker is already afflicted by his activities and wants
Peace and Rest. In other words he wants cessation of his activities.
Instead of that he is told to do something in addition to, or in place
of, his other activities. Can that be a help to the seeker?
Activity is creation; activity is the destruction of one’s inherent
happiness. If activity be advocated the adviser is not a master but
the killer. Either the Creator (Brahma) or Death (Yama) may be
said to have come in the guise of such a master. He cannot liberate
the aspirant but strengthens his fetters.
D.: When we attempt to cease from activity the very attempt is action.
So activity seems to be inevitable.
M.: True. Thayumanavar has also alluded to it. A doctor advises a
patient to take the prescribed medicine with only one condition.
That condition is not to think of a monkey when he takes the
medicine. Can the patient ever take the medicine? Will he not think
of the monkey whenever he tries not to do so?
So also, when people try to give up thoughts their object is frustrated
by their very attempt.

D.: How then is the state to be attained?
M.: What is there to attain? A thing remains to be attained if it is not
already attained. But here one’s very being is That.
Someone: Why do we not then know it?
Annamalaiswami: I should always try to think I am That.
M.: Why should one think “I am That”? He is That only. Does a man
go on thinking that he is a man?
Mr. Anantachari: The belief ‘I am a man’ is so deep that we cannot
help thinking so.
M.: Why should you think “I am a man”? If you are challenged you
may say ‘I am a man’. Therefore the thought - ‘I am a man’ - is
called up when another thought, say ‘I am an animal’, protrudes
itself. Similarly, the thought I am That is necessary only so long
as the other thought I am a man persists.
D.: The thought ‘I am a man’ is so firm that it cannot he got rid of.
M.: Be your true Self. Why should you think ‘I am a man’?
D.: The thought ‘I am a man’ is so natural.
M.: Not so. On the other hand ‘I am’ is natural. Why do you qualify
it with ‘a man’?
D.: ‘I am a man’ is so obvious whereas ‘I am That’ is not understood
by us.
M.: You are neither That nor This. The truth is ‘I am’. “I AM that I
AM” according to the Bible also. Mere Being is alone natural. To
limit it to ‘being a man’ is uncalled for.
D.: (Humorously) If votes be taken the majority will be on my side.
(Laughter)
M.: I cast my vote also on your side (Laughter). I say also ‘I am a man’:
but I am not limited to the body. It is IN ME. That is the difference.
Someone: The limitation (upadhi) of being a man cannot be got rid of.
M.: How were you in deep sleep? There was no thought of being a man.
Another: So, the state of sleep must be brought about even when one
is awake.
M.: Yes. It is jagrat-sushupti.

Sri Bhagavan continued: Some people even say that while they sleep
they are enclosed somewhere in the body. They forget that such
an idea did not persist in sleep but rises up only on waking. They
bring their waking-state to bear upon their sleep.
The lights went down and all retired.

Talk 602.
1st January, 1939
Dr. Emile Gatheir, S. J., Professor of Philosophy at the Sacred Heart
College, Shembaganur, Kodaikanal, asked: “Can you kindly give me
a summary of your teachings?”
M.: They are found in small booklets, particularly Who am l?
D.: I shall read them. But may I have the central point of your
teachings from your lips?
M.: The central point is the thing.
D.: It is not clear.
M.: Find the Centre.
D.: I am from God. Is not God distinct from me?
M.: Who asks this question? God does not ask it. You ask it. So find
who you are and then you may find if God is distinct from you.
D.: But God is Perfect and I am imperfect. How can I ever know
Him fully?
M.: God does not say so. The question is for you. After finding who
you are you may see what God is.
D.: But you have found your Self. Please let us know if God is distinct
from you.
M.: It is a matter of experience. Each one must experience it himself.
D.: Oh! I see. But God is Infinite and I am finite. I have a personality
which can never merge into God. Is it not so?
M.: Infinity and Perfection do not admit of parts. If a finite being
comes out of infinity the perfection of infinity is marred. Thus your
statement is a contradiction in terms.
D.: No. I see both God and creation.
M.: How are you aware of your personality?

D.: I have a soul. I know it by its activities.
M.: Did you know it in deep sleep?
D.: The activities are suspended in deep sleep.
M.: But you exist in sleep. So do you now too. Which of these two
is your real state?
D.: Sleep and waking are mere accidents. I am the substance behind
the accidents.
(He looked up at the clock and said that it was time for him to catch
the train. He left after thanking Sri Bhagavan. So the conversation
ended abruptly).

Talk 603.
8th January, 1939
Lady Bateman came here with her daughter to visit Sri Bhagavan. She brought
a letter from Pascaline Maillert, Versailles, which reads as follows:
“Two years have come and gone since last I crossed the threshold of
Thy Ashram and yet in spirit I have ever remained there.
“Though illusion still often veils the vision of Reality revealed in the
blessed Silence of Thy Presence.
“Though the Silver Thread of Self-awareness be often lost midst changing
light and shadows, still the inner urge to realise the Self remains and
stronger grows and more insistent as Grace and search go hand in hand.
“At times, yet rare, with no apparent cause, spontaneous awareness
of the ‘I’ springs up and bliss fills the heart with glowing warmth.
Effortless concentration goes with this state while all desires do come
to rest fulfilled in utmost peace, till once more the veil is drawn and
illusion seeks to blur the vision of the Real.
“Yet what the soul has experienced and knows repeatedly as Truth,
can neither be denied nor ever forgotten and ‘That which is’ gives
constant strength to persevere.
“I pray to Thee as to my Self for light and guidance that I know are
ever there and at Thy feet lay offerings of unchanging love.”
(Sd.) Pascaline, 11, Rue des Reservous.
Versailles, 21st November, 1938.

Talk 604.
10th January, 1939
A certain lady was singing a devotional song. It said among other things:
“Thou art my father,
Thou art my mother,
Thou art my relations,
My possessions and all,” and so on.
Sri Bhagavan remarked with a smile, “Yes, Yes, Thou art this,
that and everything except ‘I’. Why not say ‘I am Thou’ and
finish it?”
Talk 605.
A certain Andhra visitor gave Sri Bhagavan a slip of paper containing
several questions which he desired to be answered. Sri Bhagavan took
it in His hands, went through the questions and said:
M.: “All these questions arise so long as there is one who can ask
questions. If the questioner is sought and found, the questions will
end of their own accord.”
The man said in reply: Several people raise these points and I do not
know how to meet them. Hence I desire to know the fact (vishaya
was the word used).
M.: If the vishayi (i.e., the basis of the facts) be understood, the
vishayas (i.e., the facts) become clear.
Talk 606.
Mr. Venkatakrishnayya, a lawyer-devotee, visited Sri Bhagavan ten
years before and asked Him what he should do to improve himself.
Sri Bhagavan told him to perform Gayatri Japa. The young man went
away satisfied. When he returned after some years, he asked:
D.: If I meditate on the meaning of the Gayatri mantra, my mind
again wanders. What is to be done?
M.: Were you told to meditate on the mantra or its meaning? You
must think of the one who repeats the mantra.

Again, the same man had seen another reputed Mahatma who told him
to say Om Namah instead of “OM” because pure “OM” is meant for
sannyasis whereas others can repeat Om Namah. When he came here
he asked Sri Bhagavan about it. Sri Bhagavan replied casually:
Should not others besides the sannyasis enquire into the Self and
realise it?

Talk 607.
17th January, 1939
Sri Bhagavan said to Lady Bateman: There is a fixed state; sleep,
dream and waking states are mere movements in it. They are like
pictures moving on the screen in a cinema show.
Everyone sees the screen as well as the pictures but ignores
the screen and takes in the pictures alone. The Jnani however
considers only the screen and not the pictures. The pictures certainly
move on the screen yet do not affect it. The screen itself does not
move but remains stationary.
Similarly, a person travels in a train and thinks that he moves.
Really speaking he sits and reposes in his seat, and it is the train
which is steaming fast. He however superimposes the motion of the
train on himself because he has identified himself with the body.
He says, “I have passed one station - now another - yet another
- and so on”. A little consideration will show that he sits unmoved
and the stations run past him. But that does not prevent him from
saying that he has travelled all the way as if he exerted himself to
move every foot of the way.
The Jnani is fully aware that the true state of Being remains fixed
and stationary and that all actions go on around him. His nature
does not change and his state is not affected in the least. He looks
on everything with unconcern and remains blissful himself.
His is the true state and also the primal and natural state of being. When
once the man reaches it he gets fixed there. Fixed once, fixed ever he
will be. Therefore that state which prevailed in the days of Pathala
Linga Cellar continues uninterrupted, with only this difference that
the body remained there immobile but is now active.

There is no difference between a Jnani and an ajnani in their
conduct. The difference lies only in their angles of vision. The
ignorant man identifies himself with the ego and mistakes its
activities for those of the Self, whereas the ego of the Jnani has
been lost and he does not limit himself to this body or that, this
event or that, and so on.
There is action in seeming inaction, and also inaction in seeming
action as in the following instances:
1. A child is fed while asleep. On waking up the next morning, he
denies having been fed. It is a case of inaction in seeming action.
For although the mother saw him take his food the child himself
is not aware.
2. The cartman sleeps in the cart when it jogs along the way in the
night and yet he reaches the destination and claims to have driven
the cart. This is a case of action in seeming inaction.
3. A man appearing to listen to a story nods his head to the speaker
but yet his mind is otherwise active and he does not really follow
the story.
4. Two friends sleep side by side. One of them dreams that both
of them travel round the globe and have varied experiences. On
waking the dreamer tells the other that both of them have been
round the earth. The other treats the story with contempt.
The lady protested that dream and sleep do not make any appeal to
her. She was asked why then she should be careful about her bed
unless she courted sleep.
She said that it was for relaxation of the exhausted limbs, rather a
state of auto-intoxication. “The sleep state is really dull, whereas
the waking state is full of beautiful and interesting things.”
M.: What you consider to be filled with beautiful and interesting things
is indeed the dull and ignorant state of sleep, according to the Jnani:
Ya nisha sarva bhootanam tasyam jagrati samyami.
The wise one is wide awake just where darkness rules for others.
You must certainly wake up from the sleep which is holding you
at present.

Talk 608.
18th January, 1939
Mrs. Hick Riddingh wrote two questions on a slip of paper and asked
Sri Bhagavan if her interpretations were correct.
M.: The Self is beyond ignorance and knowledge. It is Absolute.
These doubts do not arise to the Self for it is Pure Consciousness
and cannot admit of dark ignorance.
D.: From our point of view they arise.
M.: See to whom they arise. Go to their root. See if they arise after
you reach their source and hold on to it.
D.: But at the present moment -
M.: Such discussions are theoretical and there will be no end to them.
One must be practical and try to solve the problems for oneself by the
method suggested. The method has been pointed out already. Find out
to whom the questions arise. They resolve themselves immediately.
Talk 609.
Lady Bateman and others came to the hall at about 3-30 p.m. In a few
minutes she asked in writing if one is nearer to Pure Consciousness
in deep sleep than in the waking state.
M.: The sleep, dream and waking states are mere phenomena
appearing on the Self which is itself stationary and also a state of
simple awareness. Can anyone remain away from the Self at any
moment? This question can arise only if that were possible.
D.: Is it not often said that one is nearer Pure Consciousness in deep
slumber than in the waking state?
M.: The question may as well be: Am I nearer to myself in my sleep
than in my waking state?
For the Self is Pure Consciousness. No one can ever be away from
the Self. The question is possible only if there is duality. But there
is no duality in the state of Pure Consciousness.
The same person sleeps, dreams and wakes up. The waking state is
considered to be full of beautiful and interesting things. The absence
of such experiences makes one say that the sleep state is dull. Before

we proceed further let us make this point clear. Do you not admit
that you exist in your sleep?
D.: Yes, I do.
M.: You are the same person that is now awake. Is it not so?
D.: Yes.
M.: So there is a continuity in the sleep and the waking states. What
is that continuity? It is only the state of Pure Being.
There is a difference in the two states. What is that difference? The
incidents, namely, the body, the world and the objects appear in
the waking state but they disappear in sleep.
D.: But I am not aware in my sleep.
M.: True, there is no awareness of the body or of the world. But you
must exist in your sleep in order to say now “I was not aware in my
sleep”. Who says so now? It is the wakeful person. The sleeper cannot
say so. That is to say, the individual who is now identifying the Self
with the body says that such awareness did not exist in sleep.
Because you identify yourself with the body, you see the world
around you and say that the waking state is filled with beautiful and
interesting things. The sleep state appears dull because you were
not there as an individual and therefore these things were not. But
what is the fact? There is the continuity of Being in all the three
states, but no continuity of the individual and the objects.
D.: Yes.
M.: That which is continuous is also enduring, i.e. permanent. That
which is discontinuous is transitory.
D.: Yes.
M.: Therefore the state of Being is permanent and the body and the
world are not. They are fleeting phenomena passing on the screen
of Being-Consciousness which is eternal and stationary.
D.: Relatively speaking, is not the sleep state nearer to Pure
Consciousness than the waking state?
M.: Yes, in this sense: When passing from sleep to waking the ‘I’
thought must start; the mind comes into play; thoughts arise;
and then the functions of the body come into operation; all these

together make us say that we are awake. The absence of all this
evolution is the characteristic of sleep and therefore it is nearer to
Pure Consciousness than the waking state.
But one should not therefore desire to be always in sleep. In the
first place it is impossible, for it will necessarily alternate with the
other states. Secondly it cannot be the state of bliss in which the
Jnani is, for his state is permanent and not alternating. Moreover,
the sleep state is not recognised to be one of awareness by people,
but the sage is always aware. Thus the sleep state differs from the
state in which the sage is established.
Still more, the sleep state is free from thoughts and their impression
to the individual. It cannot be altered by one’s will because
effort is impossible in that condition. Although nearer to Pure
Consciousness, it is not fit for efforts to realise the Self.
The incentive to realise can arise only in the waking state and efforts
can also be made only when one is awake. We learn that the thoughts
in the waking state form the obstacle to gaining the stillness of sleep.
“Be still and know that I AM God”. So stillness is the aim of the seeker.
Even a single effort to still at least a single thought even for a trice goes
a long way to reach the state of quiescence. Effort is required and it
is possible in the waking state only. There is the effort here: there is
awareness also; the thoughts are stilled; so there is the peace of sleep
gained. That is the state of the Jnani. It is neither sleep nor waking
but intermediate between the two. There is the awareness of the
waking state and the stillness of sleep. It is called jagrat-sushupti.
Call it wakeful sleep or sleeping wakefulness or sleepless waking or
wakeless sleep. It is not the same as sleep or waking separately. It is
atijagrat 1 (beyond wakefulness) or atisushupti 2 (beyond sleep). It
is the state of perfect awareness and of perfect stillness combined.
It lies between sleep and waking; it is also the interval between two
successive thoughts. It is the source from which thoughts spring;
we see that when we wake up from sleep. In other words thoughts
have their origin in the stillness of sleep. The thoughts make all the
difference between the stillness of sleep and the turmoil of waking.
1. Jagrat of jagrat.
2 .‘Sleep of sleep’. It is beyond jagrat and sleep as well as in them.

Go to the root of the thoughts and you reach the stillness of sleep. But you
reach it in the full vigour of search, that is, with perfect awareness.
That is again jagrat-sushupti spoken of before. It is not dullness; but
it is Bliss. It is not transitory but it is eternal. From that the thoughts
proceed. What are all our experiences but thoughts? Pleasure and
pain are mere thoughts. They are within ourselves. If you are free
from thoughts and yet aware, you are That Perfect Being.
Lady Bateman appreciated the discourse and thanked Sri Bhagavan.
Later, she said that she would be leaving the next day.
Sri Bhagavan smiled and said: You do not leave one place for another.
You are always stationary. The scenes go past you. Even from the
ordinary point of view you sit in your cabin and the ship sails but
you do not move. We see a picture of a man running several miles
and rushing towards us but the screen does not move. It is the
picture that moves on and away.
D.: I see, but I can understand it only after I realise the Self.
M.: The Self is always realised. Were Realisation something to be
gained hereafter there is an equal chance of its being lost. It will
thus be only transitory. Transitory bliss brings pain in its train. It
cannot be liberation which is eternal.
Were it true that you realise it later it means that you are not realised
now. Absence of Realisation of the present moment may be repeated at
any moment in the future, for Time is infinite. So too, such realisation is
impermanent. But that is not true. It is wrong to consider Realisation to
be impermanent. It is the True Eternal State which cannot change.
D.: Yes, I shall understand it in course of time.
M.: You are already That. Time and space cannot affect the Self. They are
in you; so also all that you see around you are in you. There is a story
to illustrate this point: A lady had a precious necklace round her neck.
Once in her excitement she forgot it and thought that the necklace was
lost. She became anxious and looked for it in her home but could not
find it. She asked her friends and neighbours if they knew anything
about the necklace. They did not. At last a kind friend of hers told her
to feel the necklace round the neck. She found that it had all along
been round her neck and she was happy! When others asked her later

if she found the necklace which was lost, she said, “Yes, I have found
it.” She still felt that she had recovered a lost jewel.
Now did she lose it at all? It was all along round her neck. But
judge her feelings. She is happy as if she had recovered a lost jewel.
Similarly with us, we imagine that we would realise that Self some
time, whereas we are never anything but the Self.
D.: I feel that I am transplanted into some other land than the earth.
Sri Bhagavan, while looking into some correspondence, heard it, smiled
and said: This is the Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven
mentioned in the Bible and this world are not two different regions.
“The Kingdom is within you,” says the Bible. So it is. The realised
being sees this as the Kingdom of Heaven whereas the others see it
as ‘this world’. The difference lies only in the angles of vision.
D.: How can we deny the world and the people therein? I hear some
music. It is sweet and grand. I recognise it to be Wagner’s music.
I cannot claim it to be mine.
M.: Does Wagner or his music exist apart from you? Unless you are
there to say that it is Wagner’s music, can you be aware of it? Without
being aware of it, can it be said to exist? To make it more clear, do
you recognise Wagner’s music in your deep sleep? And yet you admit
that you exist in sleep. So it is clear that Wagner and music are only
your thoughts. They are in you and not out of you.
D.: It is beautiful.
[Compiler’s remarks: Everyone is apt to be confused from time
to time. Although the truth is heard and understood, at times it is
forgotten, and mistakes are committed when facts face the person.
Knowledge gives place to ignorance and confusion is the result. But
the sage alone can give the right turn to our thoughts from time to time.
That is the necessity for Satsanga i.e., association with the Wise.]
Talk 610.
A devotee came with these questions.
1. Since individual souls and the Brahman are one, what is the
cause of this creation?
2. Is the Brahma-Jnani liable to bodily pains and rebirth? Can he
extend his span of life or curtail it?

M.: The object of creation is to remove the confusion of your
individuality. The question shows that you have identified yourself
with the body and therefore see yourself and the world around. You
think that you are the body. Your mind and intellect are the factors
of your wrong identity.
Do you exist in your sleep?
D.: I do.
M.: The same being is now awake and asks these questions. Is it not so?
D.: Yes.
M.: These questions did not arise in your sleep. Did they?
D.: No.
M.: Why not? Because you did not see your body and no thoughts
arose. You did not identify yourself with the body then. Therefore
these questions did not arise.
They arise now because of your identity with the body. Is it not so?
D.: Yes.
M.: Now see which is your real nature. Is it that which is free from
thoughts or that which is full of thoughts?
Being is continuous. The thoughts are discontinuous. So which is
permanent?
D.: Being.
M.: That is it. Realise it. That is your true nature. Your nature is simple
Being, free from thoughts.
Because you identify yourself with the body you want to know
about creation. The world and the objects including your body
appear in the waking state but disappear in the state of sleep. You
exist all through these states. What is it then that persists through
all these states? Find it out. That is your Self.
D.: Supposing it is found, what then?
M.: Find it out and see. There is no use asking hypothetical questions.
D.: Am I then one with Brahman?
M.: Leave Brahman alone. Find who you are. Brahman can take care
of Himself.

If you cease to identify yourself with the body no questions regarding
creation, birth, death, etc., will arise. They did not arise in your sleep.
Similarly they will not arise in the true state of the Self.
The object of creation is thus clear, that you should proceed from
where you find yourself and realise your true Being
You could not raise the question in your sleep because there
is no creation there. You raise the question now because your
thoughts appear and there is creation. Creation is thus found to
be only your thoughts.
Take care of yourself and the Brahma-jnani will take care of
Himself. If you know your true nature, you will understand the
state of Brahma-jnana. It is futile to explain it now. Because you
think that you see a Jnani before you and you identify him with a
body just as you have identified yourself with yours, you also think
that he feels pains and pleasures like yourself.
D.: But I must know if he is a Jnani for I must be inspired by him.
M.: Yes, he tells you; he inspires. Do as he tells you. You want to
learn and not test him.
Jnana lakshanas are stated in the sastras to be an incentive to a
seeker to get rid of misery and seek happiness. The methods are
given. If they are followed the result will be jnana having those
lakshanas. They are not meant for testing others.
Talk 611.
D.: I think that the soul is the light within. If after death it becomes
one with Brahman how can there be transmigration of soul?
M.: Within whom? Who dies?
D.: I shall then frame my question in a different way.
M.: Dialectics are not wanted. Consider the answer and see.
D.: How?
M.: Now that you identify yourself with the body you say that the soul
is the light within. You mean that there is light within the body.
Think a little and say if the body can raise any questions. It is
insentient and cannot say ‘I’. Something else says ‘I’. What is it?
Can it be the Self? The Self is pure and is not aware of any other so

as to be able to say ‘I’. Who then says ‘I’? It is the link between the
pure Chit (the Self) and the jada (the body). That is the ego. Who
are you now? What is it that is born? The Self is eternal and cannot
be born. The body appears and disappears and your identity with
it makes you speak of birth and death. See if the true significance
of ‘I’ can ever take birth. For whom is transmigration?
D.: Sir, we are here to have our doubts cleared.
M.: Certainly.
D.: Our doubts can be cleared only when we ask questions.
M.: Yes. No one objects to questions being asked.
D.: It is said pariprasnena sevaya (by questioning again and again
and by service). So we should ask questions and the Master should
kindly remove our doubts.
M.: Continue your quotation upadekshyanti tattvam (They give
instructions in Truth).
D.: Yes. But our doubts must be cleared.
M.: So it was with Arjuna. For he says in the end nashto mohah
smritirlabdha (lost is my ignorance; memory restored).
D.: It was in the end. Before then he asked so many questions.
M.: The Truth was revealed even at the start. For the very first sloka of Sri
Krishna’s upadesa starts: “No birth and no death, no change, etc.”
D.: Sri Krishna also says, “We have had many rebirths. I am aware
of them; but you are not.”
M.: That was only because the question arose how Sri Krishna
could claim to have taught the eternal Truth to Aditya. The Truth
was stated even at the start. Arjuna did not understand it. The
jnani’s state was later described and also the means of attainment.
Incidentally Sri Krishna said that the Truth was eternal and that
He had originally taught the same to Aditya. Arjuna was all along
identifying himself with the body and therefore thought that Sri
Krishna also was the body in front of him. He therefore asked,
“How can it be? You (Sri Krishna) were born of Devaki some years
before. Aditya was among those who started creation. How could
you have taught this Truth to Aditya?”

Sri Krishna continues to answer Arjuna’s questions in that strain: “Many
rebirths we have had. I know them all; but you do not,” and so on.
D.: We must also know the Truth.
M.: You are taught the Truth. Instructions have been given. See who
you are. That is the whole instruction.

Talk 612.
19th January, 1939
Mrs. Hick Riddingh asked Sri Bhagavan in writing:
When Bhagavan writes about the help given towards attaining Self-Realisation
by the gracious glance of the Master or looking upon the
Master, how exactly is this to be understood?”
M.: Who is the Master? Who is the seeker?
D.: The Self.
M.: If the Self be the Master and also the seeker, how can the questions
arise at all?
D.: That is just my difficulty. I must seek the Self within myself.
What is then the significance of the writing above referred to? It
seems contradictory.
M.: It is not. The statement has not been rightly understood.
If the seeker knows the Master to be the Self he sees no duality in
other respects either and is therefore happy, so that no questions
arise for him.
But the seeker does not bring the truth of the statement to bear in
practice. It is because of his ignorance. This ignorance is however
unreal. The Master is required to wake up the seeker from the
slumber of ignorance and he therefore uses these words in order
to make Reality clear to others.
The only thing that matters is that you see the Self. This. can be
done wherever you remain. The Self must be sought within. The
search must be steadfast. If that is gained there is no need to stay
near the Master as a physical being.
The ‘statement’ is meant for those who cannot find the Self
remaining where they are.

Mr. Ward Jackson: The lady’s difficulty is real and I sympathise
with her. She asks, “If we could see the Self within ourselves,
why should we have come all the way to see Him? We had been
thinking of Him so long and it is only right that we came here. Is
it then unnecessary to do so?”
M.: You have done well in having come. “Isvaro gururatmeti” (The
Self is the God and Guru). A person seeks happiness and learns
that God alone can make one happy. He prays to God and worships
Him. God hears his prayers, and responds by appearing in human
shape as a Master in order to speak the language of the devotee and
make him understand the Reality. The Master is thus God manifest
as human being. He gives out His experience so that the seeker
might also gain it. His experience is to abide as the Self. The Self
is within. God, Master and the Self are therefore seeming stages
in the Realisation of the Truth. You have doubts on reading books.
You have come here to have them cleared. That is only right.
Mrs. H. R.: I understand the Self to be the Master and must be sought
within. So I can do it where I live.
M.: The understanding has been theoretical. When it is put into
practice difficulties and doubts arise. If you can feel the presence
of the Master where you are, your doubts are readily overcome, for
the Master’s part consists in removing the doubts of the seeker.
The purpose of your visit is fulfilled if the doubts do not arise hereafter,
and you apply yourself steadily in the search for the Self.
D.: I understand it all along.
M.: Good. The objection is not to your conclusion but it is to your
doubts.
Mr. W. J.: When we read about it we read it intellectually. But it is all too
remote. When we see you in body we are brought nearer to Reality and
it gives us courage to bring our knowledge into our everyday life.
If one realised the Self and acted up to it in the West, one would
be locked up in a lunatic asylum. (Laughter.)
M.: You will be locking yourself in. Because the world is mad,
considers you mad. Where is the lunatic asylum if it is not within.
You will not be in it, but it will be in you. (Laughter).

Uncertainties, doubts and fears are natural to everyone until the Self is
realised. They are inseparable from the ego, rather they are the ego.
D.: How are they to disappear?
M.: They are the ego. If the ego goes they go with it. The ego is
itself unreal. What is the ego? Enquire. The body is insentient and
cannot say ‘I’ . The Self is pure consciousness and non-dual. It
cannot say ‘I’ . No one says, ‘I’ in sleep. What is the ego then? It
is something intermediate between the inert body and the Self. It
has no locus standi. If sought for it vanishes like a ghost. You see,
a man imagines that there is something by his side in darkness; it
may be some dark object. If he looks closely the ghost is not to be
seen, but some dark object which he could identify as a tree or a
post, etc. If he does not look closely the ghost strikes terror in the
person. All that is required is only to look closely and the ghost
vanishes. The ghost was never there. So also with the ego. It is
an intangible link between the body and Pure Consciousness. It is
not real. So long as one does not look closely it continues to give
trouble. But when one looks for it, it is found not to exist.
Again, in a Hindu marriage function, the feasts continue five or
six days. A stranger was mistaken for the best man by the bride’s
party and they therefore treated him with special regard. Seeing him
treated with special regard by the bride’s party, the bridegroom’s
party considered him to be some man of importance related to the
bride’s party and therefore they too showed him special respect.
The stranger had altogether a happy time of it. He was also all
along aware of the real situation. On one occasion the groom’s
party wanted to refer to him on some point. They asked for him.
He scented trouble and made himself scarce. So it is with the ego.
If looked for, it disappears. If not, it continues to give trouble.
How it is to be looked for is learnt from those who have already
done so. That is the reason why the Master is approached.
D.: If the search has to be made within, is it necessary to be in the
physical proximity of the Master?
M.: It is necessary to do so until all doubts are at an end.
D.: If the ego is unreal and troublesome why did we take so much
pains to develop it?

M.: Its growth and the trouble consequent on such growth make you look
for the cause of it all. Its development is for its own destruction.
D.: Is it not said that one must be like a child before one advances
spiritually?
M.: Yes, because the ego is not developed in the child.
D.: I mean exactly the same. We could have remained like the child
instead of having developed the ego.
M.: The state of the child is meant. No one can take lessons from the
child for the Realisation of the Self. The Master’s state is like the
state of the child. There is a difference between the two. The ego is
potential in the child, whereas it is totally destroyed in the saint.
D.: Yes, I see, I understand it now.
M.: The Reality is alone and eternal. To understand it is good enough.
But the old ignorance should not return. A good watch must be kept
lest the present understanding of the Truth suffers later on.
A disciple served a master a long time and realised the Self. He was
in Bliss and wanted to express his gratitude to the master. He was in
tears of joy and his voice choked when he spoke. He said, “What a
wonder that I did not know my very Self all these years? I suffered
long and you so graciously helped me to realise the Self. How shall I
repay your Grace? It is not in my power to do it!” The master replied:
“Well, well. Your repayment consists in not lapsing into ignorance
over again but in continuing in the state of your real Self.”
[Compiler’s remarks: The Self is the Master and all else. The Realisation
of the Self means Self-surrender or merging into the Master. What more
can anyone do? That is the highest form of gratitude to the Master].

Talk 613.
21st January, 1939
A young man asked: “Are thoughts mere matter?”
M.: What do you mean? Do you mean ‘matter’ like the things you
see around you?
D.: Yes - gross.
M.: Who asks this question? Who is the thinker?

D.: The thinker is spirit.
M.: Do you then mean that spirit generates matter?
D.: I want to know.
M.: How do you distinguish between matter and spirit?
D.: Spirit is consciousness and the other not.
M.: Can consciousness generate non-consciousness, or light darkness?

Talk 614.
24th January, 1939
There were a few respectable men in the hall. Sri Bhagavan spoke to them
some time after their arrival. Where is the use of trying to remember the
past or discover the future? That which matters is only the present. Take
care of it and the other things will take care of themselves.
D.: Is it bad to desire something?
M.: One should not be elated on having his desire fulfilled or
disappointed on being frustrated. To be elated on the fulfilment
of desire is so deceitful. A gain will certainly be lost ultimately.
Therefore elation must end in pain at a future date. One should not
give place to feelings of pleasure or pain, come what may. How do
the events affect the person? You do not grow by acquiring something
nor wither away by losing it. You remain what you always are.
D.: We worldly men cannot resist desire.
M.: You may desire but be prepared for any eventuality. Make effort,
but do not be lost in the result. Accept with equanimity whatever
happens. For pleasure and pain are mere mental modes. They have
no relation to the objective realities.
D.: How?
M.: There were two young friends in a village in South India. They were
learned and wanted to earn something with which they might afford
relief to their respective families. They took leave of their parents and
went to Benares on a pilgrimage. On the way one of them died. The
other was left alone. He wandered for a time, and in the course of a few
months he made a good name and earned some money. He wanted to
earn more before he returned to his home. In the meantime he met a

pilgrim who was going south and would pass through the native village
of the young pandit. He requested the new acquaintance to tell his parents
that he would return after a few months with some funds and also that his
companion had died on the way. The man came to the village and found
the parents. He gave them the news, but changed the names of the two
men. Consequently the parents of the living man bemoaned his supposed
loss and the parents of the dead man were happy expecting the return of
their son bringing rich funds as well.
You see therefore that pleasure and pain have no relation to the
actualities but are mere mental modes.
Talk 615.
Another from the group asked: How is the ego to be destroyed?
M.: Hold the ego first and then ask how it is to be destroyed. Who asks
this question? It is the ego. Can the ego ever agree to kill itself? This
question is a sure way to cherish the ego and not to kill it. If you seek
the ego you will find it does not exist. That is the way to destroy it.
In this connection I am often reminded of a funny incident which
took place when I was living in the West Chitrai Street in Madura. A
neighbour in an adjoining house anticipated the visit of a thief to his
house. He took precautions to catch him. He posted policemen in mufti
to guard the two ends of the lane, the entrance and the back-door to his
own house. The thief came as expected and the men rushed to catch him.
He took in the situation at a glance and shouted “Hold him, hold him.
There - he runs - there - there.” Saying so he made good his escape.
So it is with the ego. Look for it and it will not be found. That is
the way to get rid of it.

23rd to 28th January, 1939
Talk 616.
D.: Is the Jivanadi an entity or a figment of the imagination?
M.: The yogis say that there is a nadi called the jivanadi, atmanadi or
paranadi. The Upanishads speak of a centre from which thousands
of nadis branch off. Some locate such a centre in the brain and
others in other centres. The Garbhopanishad traces the formation
of the foetus and the growth of the child in the womb. The jiva is

considered to enter the child through the fontanelle in the seventh
month of its growth. In evidence thereof it is pointed out that the
fontanelle is tender in a baby and is also seen to pulsate. It takes
some months for it to ossify. Thus the jiva comes from above, enters
through the fontanelle and works through the thousands of the
nadis which are spread over the whole body. Therefore the seeker
of Truth must concentrate on the sahasrara, that is the brain, in
order to regain his source. Pranayama is said to help the yogi to
rouse the Kundalini Sakti which lies coiled in the solar plexus. The
sakti rises through a nerve called the Sushumna, which is imbedded
in the core of the spinal cord and extends to the brain.
If one concentrates on the Sahasrara there is no doubt that the ecstasy
of samadhi ensues. The vasanas, that is the latencies, are not however
destroyed. The yogi is therefore bound to wake up from the samadhi,
because release from bondage has not yet been accomplished. He
must still try to eradicate the vasanas in order that the latencies yet
inherent in him may not disturb the peace of his samadhi. So he
passes down from the sahasrara to the heart through what is called
the jivanadi, which is only a continuation of the Sushumna. The
Sushumna is thus a curve. It starts from the solar plexus, rises through
the spinal cord to the brain and from there bends down and ends in
the heart. When the yogi has reached the heart, the samadhi becomes
permanent. Thus we see that the heart is the final centre.
Some Upanishads also speak of 101 nadis which spread from the heart,
one of them being the vital nadi. If the jiva comes down from above and
gets reflected in the brain, as the yogis say, there must be a reflecting
surface in action. That must also be capable of limiting the Infinite
Consciousness to the limits of the body. In short the Universal Being
becomes limited as a jiva. Such reflecting medium is furnished by the
aggregate of the vasanas of the individual. It acts like the water in a
pot which reflects the image of an object. If the pot be drained of its
water there will be no reflection. The object will remain without being
reflected. The object here is the Universal Being-Consciousness which
is all-pervading and therefore immanent in all. It need not be cognised
by reflection alone; it is self-resplendent. Therefore the seeker’s aim
must be to drain away the vasanas from the heart and let no reflection
obstruct the Light of Eternal Consciousness. This is achieved by the

search for the origin of the ego and by diving into the heart. This is the
direct method for Self-Realisation. One who adopts it need not worry
about nadis, the brain, the Sushumna, the Paranadi, the Kundalini,
pranayama or the six centres.
The Self does not come from anywhere else and enter the body through
the crown of the head. It is as it is, ever sparkling, ever steady, unmoving
and unchanging. The changes which are noticed are not inherent in
the Self which abides in the Heart and is self-luminous like the Sun.
The changes are seen in Its Light. The relation between the Self and
the body or the mind may be compared to that of a clear crystal and
its background. If the crystal is placed against a red flower, it shines
red; if placed against a green leaf it shines green, and so on. The
individual confines himself to the limits of the changeful body or of
the mind which derives its existence from the unchanging Self. All
that is necessary is to give up this mistaken identity, and that done, the
ever-shining Self will be seen to be the single non-dual Reality.
The reflection of Consciousness is said to be in the subtle body
(sukshma sarira), which appears to be composed of the brain and
the nerves radiating from it to all parts of the trunk, chiefly through
the spinal column and the solar plexus.
When I was on the Hill, Nayana (Kavyakantha Ganapathi Muni)
once argued that the brain was the seat of the vasanas, because it
consisted of innumerable cells in which the vasanas were contained
and illuminated by the light of the Self which projected from the
heart. Only this set a person working or thinking.
But I said, “How can it be so? The vasanas must be with one’s Self
and can never remain away from the Self. If, as you say, the vasanas
be contained in the brain and the Heart is the seat of the Self, a person
who is decapitated must be rid of his vasanas and should not be
reborn. You agree that it is absurd. Now can you say that the Self is
in the brain with the vasanas? If so, why should the head bend down
when one falls asleep? Moreover a person does not touch his head
and say ‘I’. Therefore it follows that the Self is in the Heart and the
vasanas are also there in an exceedingly subtle form.
“When the vasanas are projected from the Heart they are associated
with the Light of the Self and the person is said to think. The

vasanas which lie imbedded in an atomic condition grow in size
in their passage from the heart to the brain. The brain is the screen
on which the images of the vasanas are thrown and it is also the
place of their functional distribution. The brain is the seat of the
mind, and the mind works through it.”
So then this is what happens. When a vasana is released and it comes
into play, it is associated with the light of the Self. It passes from the
heart to the brain and on its way it grows more and more until it holds
the field all alone and all the vasanas are thus kept in abeyance for the
time being. When the thought is reflected in the brain it appears as an
image on a screen. The person is then said to have a clear perception
of things. He is a great thinker or discoverer. Neither the thought that
is extolled as being original, nor the thing, nor the country which
is claimed to be a new discovery, is really original or new. It could
not manifest unless it was already in the mind. It was of course very
subtle and remained imperceptible, because it lay repressed by the
more urgent or insistent thoughts or vasanas. When they have spent
themselves this thought arises and by concentration the Light of
the Self makes it clear, so that it appears magnificent, original and
revolutionary. In fact it was only within all along.
This concentration is called samyamana in the Yoga Sastras. One’s
desires can be fulfilled by this process and it is said to be a siddhi. It
is how the so-called new discoveries are made. Even worlds can be
created in this manner. Samyamana leads to all siddhis. But they do
not manifest so long as the ego lasts. Concentration according to yoga
ends in the destruction of the experiencer (ego), experience and the
world, and then the quondam desires get fulfilled in due course. This
concentration bestows on individuals even the powers of creating
new worlds. It is illustrated in the Aindava Upakhyana in the Yoga
Vasishta and in the Ganda Saila Loka in the Tripura Rahasya.
Although the powers appear to be wonderful to those who do not
possess them, yet they are only transient. It is useless to aspire for
that which is transient. All these wonders are contained in the one
changeless Self. The world is thus within and not without. This
meaning is contained in verses 11 and 12 - Chapter V of Sri Ramana
Gita “The entire Universe is condensed in the body, and the entire

body in the Heart. Thus the Heart is the nucleus of the whole Universe.”
Therefore Samyamana relates to concentration on different parts of
the body for the different siddhis. Also the Visva or the Virat is said to
contain the cosmos within the limits of the body. Again, “The world
is not other than the mind, the mind is not other than the Heart; that
is the whole truth.” So the Heart comprises all. This is what is taught
to Svetaketu by the illustration of the seed of a fig tree. The source is
a point without any dimensions. It expands as the cosmos on the one
hand and as Infinite Bliss on the other. That point is the pivot. From
it a single vasana starts, multiplies as the experiencer ‘I’, experience,
and the world. The experiencer and the source are referred to in the
mantra. Two birds, exactly alike, arise simultaneously.
When I was staying in the Skandasramam I sometimes used to go out
and sit on a rock. On one such occasion there were two or three others
with me including Rangaswami Iyengar. Suddenly we noticed some
small moth-like insect shooting up like a rocket into the air from a
crevice in the rock. Within the twinkling of an eye it had multiplied
itself into millions of moths which formed a cloud and hid the sky
from view. We wondered at it and examined the place from which it
shot up. We found that it was only a pinhole and knew that so many
insects could not have issued from it in such a short time.
That is how ahankara (ego) shoots up like a rocket and
instantaneously spreads out as the Universe.
The Heart is therefore the centre. A person can never be away from
it. If he is he is already dead. Although the Upanishads say that
the jiva functions through other centres on different occasions, yet
he does not relinquish the Heart. The centres are simply places of
business (vide Vedanta Chudamani). The Self is bound to the Heart,
like a cow tethered to a peg. The movements are controlled by the
length of the rope. All its wanderings centre around the peg.
A caterpillar crawls on a blade of grass and when it has come to the
end, it seeks another support. While doing so it holds on with its
hind-legs to the blade of grass, lifts the body and sways to and fro
before it can hold another. Similarly it is with the Self. It stays in
the Heart and holds other centres also according to circumstances.
But its activities always centre round the Heart.

Talk 617.

There are five states for the individual. They are: (1) Jagrat, (2) Swapna, (3)
Sushupti, (4) Turiya, (5) Turyatita. Of these the jagrat is the waking state.

In it the jiva in the Visva aspect and the Lord in the Virat aspect,
abiding together in the eight petals of the Heart lotus, function
through the eyes and enjoy novel pleasures from various objects by
means of all the senses, organs, etc. The five gross elements which
are widespread, the ten senses, the five vital airs, the four inner
faculties, the twenty-four fundamentals - all these together form the
gross body. The jagrat state is characterised by satva guna denoted
by the letter A and presided over by the deity Vishnu. The swapna
is the dream state in which the jiva in the Taijasa aspect and the
Lord in the Hiranyagarbha aspect, abiding together in the corolla
of the Heart-Lotus, function in the neck and experience through the
mind the results of the impressions collected in the waking state.
All the principles, the five gross elements, the will and the intellect,
seventeen in all, together form the subtle body of the dream which is
characterised by the rajo guna denoted by the letter U and presided
over by the deity Brahma, so say the wise.
The sushupti is the state of deep sleep in which the jiva in the Prajna
aspect and the Lord in the Isvara aspect, abiding together in the stamen
of the Heart-Lotus, experience the bliss of the Supreme by means of
the subtle avidya (nescience). Just as a hen after roaming about in the
day calls the chicks to her, enfolds them under her wings and goes to
rest for the night, so also the subtle individual being, after finishing
the experiences of the jagrat and swapna for the time being, enters
with the impressions gathered during those states into the causal body
which is made up of nescience, characterised by tamo guna, denoted
by the letter M and presided over by the deity Rudra.
Deep sleep is nothing but the experience of pure being. The three states
go by different names, such as the three regions, the three forts, the
three deities, etc. The being always abides in the Heart, as stated above.
If in the jagrat state the Heart is not relinquished, the mental activities
are stilled and Brahman alone is contemplated, the state is called the
Turiya. Again when the individual being merges in the Supreme it is
called the turyatita. The vegetable kingdom is always in sushupti; the

animals have both swapna and sushupti; the gods (celestials) are always
in jagrat; man has all the three states; but the clear-sighted yogi abides
only in turiya, and the highest yogi remains in turyatita alone.
The three states alternate involuntarily for the average man. The last
two (turiya and turyatita) are however the results of practice and form
clear aids to liberation. Of the other three states (Jagrat, swapna and
sushupti) each one is exclusive of the other two and limited by the
conditions of time and space. They are therefore unreal.
Our very experience of the jagrat and the swapna states proves that
the Consciousness as the Self underlies all the five states, remains
perfect all along and witnesses all of them. But with regard to similar
consciousness in the deep sleep, every person is known to say “I was
not aware of anything; I slept soundly and happily”. Two facts emerge
from the statement (unawareness of anything and the happiness of sound
sleep). Unless these existed and were experienced in sleep they could
not find expression by the same person in the waking state. Inference
also leads to the same conclusion. Just as the eye sees the darkness
which remains enveloping all objects, so also the Self sees the darkness
of nescience which remained covering the phenomenal world.
This darkness was experienced when it (the Self) emerged in dots of
supreme bliss, shone a trice and fleeted away in such fine subtlety
as the rays of the moon which peer through the waving foliage. The
experience was however not through any media (such as the senses of
the mind), but bears out the fact that consciousness does exist in deep
sleep. The unawareness is owing to the absence of relative knowledge,
and the happiness to the absence of (seething) thoughts.
If the experience of bliss in deep sleep is a fact, how is it that no one among
all the human beings recollects it? A diver who has found the desired thing
under water cannot make his discovery known to the expectant persons
on the shore until he emerges from the water. Similarly the sleeper cannot
express his experience because he cannot contact the organs of expression
until he is awakened by his vasanas in due course. Therefore it follows
that the Self is the light of Sat, Chit, Ananda.
Visva, Taijasa and Prajna are the denominations of the experiencer in the
waking, dream and deep sleep states respectively. The same individual

underlies all of them. They do not therefore represent the True Self which
is pure Sat, Chit, Ananda. The experience in deep sleep was said to be the
bliss of Brahman. It is only the negative aspect of such bliss, as it is the
result of the absence of thoughts. Moreover it is transitory. Such a bliss is
only the abhasa, the counterfeit of Supreme Bliss. It is not different from
the blissful feeling of sensual pleasures. In deep sleep the Prajna is said
to be united with the Self. So the individuality is potential in sleep.
The Self is the basis of all the experiences. It remains as the witness
and the support of them all. The Reality is thus different from the
three states, the waking, the dream and the deep sleep.

Talk 618.
1st February, 1939
A gentleman from Hardwar: When I go on analysing myself I go
beyond the intellect, and then there is no happiness.
M.: Intellect is only an instrument of the Self. It cannot help you to
know what is beyond itself.
D.: I understand it. But there is no happiness beyond it.
M.: The intellect is the instrument wherewith to know unknown things.
But you are already known, being the Self which is itself knowledge;
so you do not become the object of knowledge. The intellect makes
you see things outside, and not that which is its own source.
D.: The question is repeated.
M.: The intellect is useful thus far, it helps you to analyse yourself, and
no further. It must then be merged into the ego, and the source of
the ego must be sought. If that be done the ego disappears. Remain
as that source and then the ego does not arise
D.: There is no happiness in that state.
M.: ‘There is no happiness’ is only a thought. The Self is bliss, pure
and simple. You are the Self. So you cannot but be bliss; being so,
you cannot say here is no happiness. That which says so cannot be
the Self; it is the non-Self and must be got rid of in order to realise
the bliss of the Self.
D.: How is that to be done?

M.: See wherefrom the thought arises. It is the mind. See for whom
the mind or intellect functions. For the ego. Merge the intellect in
the ego and seek the source of the ego. The ego disappears. ‘I know’
and ‘I do not know’ imply a subject and an object. They are due to
duality. The Self is pure and absolute, One and alone. There are no
two selves so that one may know the other. What is duality then?
It cannot be the Self which is One and alone. It must be non-Self.
Duality is the characteristic of the ego. When thoughts arise duality
is present; know it to be the ego, and seek its source.
The degree of the absence of thoughts is the measure of your progress
towards Self-Realisation. But Self-Realisation itself does not admit of
progress; it is ever the same. The Self remains always in realisation.
The obstacles are thoughts. Progress is measured by the degree of
removal of the obstacles to understanding that the Self is always
realised. So thoughts must be checked by seeking to whom they
arise. So you go to their Source, where they do not arise.
D.: Doubts are always arising. Hence my question.
M.: A doubt arises and is cleared; another arises and that is cleared,
making way for another, and so it goes on. So there is no possibility
of clearing away all doubts. See to whom the doubts arise. Go to their
source and abide in it. Then they cease to arise. That is how doubts are
to be cleared. Atma samstham manah krtva na kinchidapi chintayet.
D.: Grace alone can help me to it.
M.: Grace is not exterior. In fact your very desire for grace is due to
grace that is already in you.
Talk 619.
An Andhra gentleman read out a verse from the Viveka Chudamani
setting forth the sense of the Maitreyi Brahmana of the Brihadaranyaka
Upanishad and asked the meaning of atma which occurred there.
M.: The Self.
D.: Is not prema (love) for something else?
M.: The desire for happiness (sukha prema) is a proof of the ever-existing
happiness of the Self. Otherwise how can desire for it arise
in you? If headache was natural to human beings no one would

try to get rid of it. But everyone that has a headache tries to get rid
of it, because he has known a time when he had no headache. He
desires only that which is natural to him. So too he desires happiness
because happiness is natural to him. Being natural, it is not acquired.
Man’s attempts can only be to get rid of misery. If that be done the
ever-present bliss is felt. The primal bliss is obscured by the non-self
which is synonymous with non-bliss or misery. Duhkha nasam =
sukha prapti. (Loss of unhappiness amounts to gain of happiness.)
Happiness mixed with misery is only misery. When misery is
eliminated then the ever-present bliss is said to be gained. Pleasure
which ends in pain is misery. Man wants to eschew such pleasure.
Pleasures are priya, moda and pra-moda. When a desired object is
near at hand there arises priya: when it is taken possession of moda
arises; when it is being enjoyed pra-moda prevails. The reason for
the pleasureableness of these states is that one thought excludes all
others, and then this single thought also merges into the Self. These
states are enjoyed in the Anandamaya kosa only. As a rule Vijnanamaya
kosa prevails on waking. In deep sleep all thoughts disappear and the
state of obscuration is one of bliss; there the prevailing body is the
Anandamaya. These are sheaths and not the core, which is interior
to all these. It lies beyond waking, dream and deep sleep. That is the
Reality and consists of true bliss (nijananda).
D.: Is not hatha yoga necessary for the inquiry into the Self?
M.: Each one finds some one method suitable to himself, because of
latent tendencies (purva samskara).
D.: Can hatha yoga be accomplished at my age?
M.: Why do you think of all that? Because you think it exterior to
yourself you desire it and try for it. But do you not exist all along?
Why do you leave yourself and go after something external?
D.: It is said in Aparoksha-anubhuti that hatha yoga is a necessary
aid for inquiry into the Self.
M.: The hatha yogis claim to keep the body fit so that the enquiry
may be effected without obstacles. They also say that life must be
prolonged so that the enquiry may be carried to a successful end.
Furthermore there are those who use some medicines (kayakalpa)
with that end in view. Their favourite example is: the screen must

be perfect before the painting is begun. Yes, but which is the screen
and which the painting? According to them the body is the screen
and the inquiry into the Self is the painting. But is not the body
itself a picture on the screen, the Self?
D.: But hatha yoga is so much spoken of as an aid.
M.: Yes. Even great pandits well versed in the Vedanta continue the
practice of it. Otherwise their minds will not subside. So you may
say it is useful for those who cannot otherwise still the mind.
D.: Saguna upasana (worship of the personal God) is said to be
imperfect. It is also said that nirguna upasana (devotion to the
impersonal) is hard and risky. I am fit for the former only. What
is to be done?
M.: The Saguna merges into the nirguna in the long run. The saguna
purifies the mind and takes one to the final goal. The afflicted one,
the seeker of knowledge, and the seeker of gains are all dear to
God. But the Jnani is the Self of God.
Talk 620.
D.: “Not this - not this”. That is the teaching to the seeker. He is told
that the Self is Supreme. How is it to be found?
M.: The Self is said to be the hearer, thinker, knower, etc. But that is
not all. It is also described as the ear of ear, the mind of mind, etc.;
and by what means to know the knower?
D.: But this does not say what the Self is.
M.: “Not this - not this”.
D.: It only negates.
M.: (Silence).
The devotee complains that the Self is not pointed out.
M.: A man wants to know what he is. He sees animals and objects
around him. He is told: ‘You are not a cow, not a horse, not a tree,
not this, not that, and so on’. If again the man asks saying ‘You
have not said what I am,’ the answer will be, ‘It is not said you are
not a man’. He must find out for himself that he is a man. So you
must find out for yourself what you are.

You are told, ‘You are not this body, nor the mind, nor the intellect,
nor the ego, nor anything you can think of; find out what truly you
are’. Silence denotes that the questioner is himself the Self that is
to be found. In a svayamvara the maiden goes on saying ‘no’ to
each one until she faces her choice and then she looks downwards
and remains silent.
Talk 621.
Mr. Raj Krishna found Sri Bhagavan alone on the Hill at about 5-30
p.m. and prayed: I have been desiring since my tenth year to have a
glimpse of the Reality. I firmly believe that I can be helped in this only
by a sage like Sri Bhagavan. So I pray for Thy help.
Sri Bhagavan looked at him for a few minutes. The devotee interrupted,
saying: “Even if I cannot realise in my life let me at least not forget
it on my death bed: let me have a glimpse at least at the moment of
death so that it may stand me in good stead in the future.”
M.: It is said in the Bhagavad Gita, Ch. VIII, that whatever may be
the last thought at death, it determines the later birth of the person.
It is necessary to experience the Reality now in life in order that it
may be experienced at death. See if this moment be different from
the last one, and try to be in that desired state.
D.: I have limitations. I am unable to rise to the occasion. Grace can
achieve for me what I cannot achieve myself.
M.: True, but unless there is grace this desire will not arise.
They were walking slowly, conversing at the same time. The
devotee said: “There is a girl of eleven in Lahore. She is very
remarkable. She says she can call upon Krishna twice and remain
conscious, but if she calls the third time she becomes unconscious
and remains in trance for ten hours continuously.”
M.: So long as you think that Krishna is different from you, you call upon
Him. Falling into trance denotes the transitoriness of the samadhi.
You are always in samadhi; that is what should be realised.
D.: God-vision is glorious.
M.: God-vision is only vision of the Self objectified as the God of
one’s own faith. Know the Self.

Talk 622.
Sri Bhagavan has a bandage on his finger. Someone asked, “What is
that?” Bhagavan replied: “The finger came upon a knife”. (The Knife
is inert, and relative to it the finger is a conscious agent).
Talk 623.
Sri Bhagavan said to another devotee that there are five states:
(1) Sleep, (2) Before waking, a state free from thoughts, (3) Sense of
happiness of that freedom from thoughts (rasasvada), (4) The internal
movement of the vasanas (kashaya) and (5) Complete waking with
(distraction) vikshepa. The second of those should be made permanent.

Talk 624.
4th February, 1939
A devotee asked Sri Bhagavan: With every thought the subject and the
object appear and disappear. Does not the ‘I’ disappear when the subject
disappears thus? If that be so how can the quest of the ‘I’ proceed?
M.: The subject (knower) is only a mode of mind. Though the mode
(vritti) passes, the reality behind it does not cease. The background
of the mode is the ‘I’ in which the mind modes arise and sink.
D.: After describing the Self as srota (hearer), manta (thinker), vijnata
(knower), etc., it is again described as asrota, amanta, avijnata,
non-hearer, non-thinker, non-knower, Is it so?
M.: Just so. The common man is aware of himself only when
modifications arise in the intellect (vijnanamaya kosa); these
modifications are transient; they arise and set. Hence the vijnanamaya
(intellect) is called a kosa or sheath. When pure awareness is left
over it is itself the Chit (Self) or the Supreme. To be in one’s natural
state on the subsidence of thoughts is bliss; if that bliss be transient
- arising and setting - then it is only the sheath of bliss (Anandamaya
kosa), not the pure Self. What is needed is to fix the attention on
the pure ‘I’ after the subsidence of all thoughts and not to lose hold
of it. This has to be described as an extremely subtle thought; else
it cannot be spoken of at all, since it is no other than the Real Self.
Who is to speak of it, to whom and how?

This is well explained in the Kaivalyam and the Viveka Chudamani.
Thus though in sleep the awareness of the Self is not lost, the ignorance
of the jiva is not affected by it. For this ignorance to be destroyed this
subtle state of mind (vrittijnanam) is necessary; in the sunshine cotton
does not burn; but if the cotton be placed under a lens it catches fire
and is consumed by the rays of the Sun passing through the lens. So
too, though the awareness of the Self is present at all times, it is not
inimical to ignorance. If by meditation the subtle state of thought is
won, then ignorance is destroyed. Also in Viveka Chudamani: ativa
sukshmam paramatma tattvam na sthoola drishtya (the exceedingly
subtle Supreme Self cannot be seen by the gross eye) and esha svayam
jyotirasesha sakshi (this is Self-shining and witnesses all).
This subtle mental state is not a modification of mind called vritti.
Because the mental states are of two kinds. One is the natural state
and the other is a transformation into forms of objects. The first
is the truth, and the other is according to the doer (kartru-tantra).
When the latter perishes, jale kataka renuvat (like the clearing nut
paste in water) the former will remain over.
The means for this end is meditation. Though this is with the triad
of distinction (triputi) it will finally end in pure awareness (jnanam)
Meditation needs effort: jnanam is effortless. Meditation can be
done, or not done, or wrongly done, jnanam is not so. Meditation is
described as kartru-tantra (as doer’s own), jnanam as vastu-tantra
(the Supreme’s own).

Talk 625.
7th February, 1939
Miss Merston, an English lady visitor: I have read Who am I? While
inquiring who the ‘I’ is, I cannot hold it for any length of time.
Secondly, I have no interest in the environment, but yet I have hopes
that I shall find some interest in life.
M.: If there are no interests it is good. (The interpreter points out that
the questioner hopes to find some interest in life).
M.: That means there are those vasanas. A dreamer dreams a dream.
He sees the dream world with pleasures, pains. etc. But he wakes
up and then loses all interest in the dream world. So it is with the

waking world also. Just as the dream-world, being only a part
of yourself and not different from you, ceases to interest you, so
also the present world would cease to interest you if you awake
from this waking dream (samsara) and realise that it is a part of
your Self, and not an objective reality.
Because you think that you are apart from the objects around you,
you desire a thing. But if you understand that the thing was only
a thought-form you would no longer desire it.
All things are like bubbles on water. You are the water and the
objects are the bubbles. They cannot exist apart from the water,
but they are not quite the same as the water.
D.: I feel I am like froth.
M.: Cease that identification with the unreal and know your real
identity. Then you will be firm and no doubts can arise.
D.: But I am the froth.
M.: Because you think that way there is worry. It is a wrong
imagination. Accept your true identity with the Real. Be the water
and not the froth. That is done by diving in.
D.: If I dive in, I shall find........
M.: But even without diving in, you are That. The ideas of exterior and
interior exist only so long as you do not accept your real identity.
D.: But I took the idea from you that you want me to dive in.
M.: Yes, quite right. It was said because you are identifying yourself
with the froth and not the water. Because of this confusion the
answer was meant to draw your attention to this confusion and
bring it home to you. All that is meant is that the Self is infinite
inclusive of all that you see. There is nothing beyond It nor apart
from It. Knowing this, you will not desire anything; not desiring,
you will be content.
The Self is always realised. There is no seeking to realise what is
already - always - realised. For you cannot deny your own existence.
That existence is consciousness - the Self.
Unless you exist you cannot ask questions. So you must admit your
own existence. That existence is the Self. It is already realised.

Therefore the effort to realise results only in your realising your
present mistake - that you have not realised your Self. There is no
fresh realisation. The Self becomes revealed.
D.: That will take some years.
M.: Why years? The idea of time is only in your mind. It is not in the
Self. There is no time for the Self. Time arises as an idea after the
ego arises. But you are the Self beyond time and space; you exist
even in the absence of time and space.

Talk 626.
9th February, 1939
Another devotee: Is it not that the ‘I’ exists only in relation to a ‘this’
(aham - idam)?
M.: ‘I’, ‘this’ appear together now. But ‘this’ is contained (vyaptam)
in the ‘I’ - they are not apart. ‘This’ has to merge into and become
one with ‘I’. The ‘I’ that remains over is the true ‘I’.
Talk 627.
D.: What is staying with the Guru?
M.: It means studying the sacred lore.
D.: But there is the special virtue of the Guru’s presence.
M.: Yes. That purifies the mind.
D.: That is the effect or reward. I asked about how the disciple ought
to behave.
M.: That differs according to the type of disciple - student, householder,
what are his own ingrained mental tendencies and so on.
D.: If so, will it naturally come out right?
M.: Yes. In former times the Rishis sent their sons to others for
education.
D.: Why?
M.: Because affection stood in the way.
D.: That cannot be for the jnanis. Was it in respect of the disciples?
M.: Yes.

D.: If so would not this obstacle get removed along with all the others,
through the Master’s grace?
M.: There will be delay. Owing to the disciple’s want of reverence,
grace may become effective only after a long time.
It is said that awaking from ignorance is like awaking from a fearful
dream of a beast. It is thus. There are two taints of mind, namely veiling
and restlessness (avarana and vikshepa). Of the two, the former is evil,
the latter is not so. So long as the veiling effect of sleep persists there
is the frightful dream; on awaking the veiling ceases; and there is no
more fear. Restlessness is not a bar to happiness. To get rid of the
restlessness caused by the world, one seeks the restlessness (activity)
of being with the Guru, studying the sacred books and worshipping
God with forms, and by these awakening is attained.
What happens in the end? Karna was ever the son of Kunti. The
tenth man was such all along. Rama was Vishnu all the time. Such
is jnanam. It is being aware of That which always is.

Talk 628.
13th February, 1939
After his return from Europe, Mr. D. had a private interview with
Sri Bhagavan for a few minutes. He said that his former visit had
had some effect but not as much as he wanted. He could concentrate
on his work. Is not concentration indispensable for spiritual
progress? Karma appealed to him because that helped towards
concentration.
Sri Bhagavan: There is no karma without a karta (doer). On seeking
for the doer he disappears. Where is Karma then?
Mr. D. sought practical instruction.
M.: Seek the karta. That is the practice.
Mrs. D. said there were breaks in her awareness and desired to know
how the awareness might be made continuous.
M.: Breaks are due to thoughts. You cannot be aware of breaks unless
you think so. It is only a thought. Repeat the old practice, “To whom
do thoughts arise?” Keep up the practice until there are no breaks.
Practice alone will bring about continuity of awareness.

Talk 629.
17th February, 1939
This is Sivaratri day. Sri Bhagavan was beaming with Grace in the
evening. A Sadhaka raised the following question:
D.: Enquiry into the Self seems to take one into the subtle body
(ativahika sariram or puriashtakam or jivatma). Am I right?
M.: They are different names for the same state, but they are
used according to the different points of view. After some time
puriashtakam (the eight fold subtle body) will disappear and there
will be the ‘Eka’ (one) only.
Vritti jnana alone can destroy ‘ajnana’ (ignorance). Absolute jnana
is not inimical to ajnana.
There are two kinds of vrittis (modes of mind). (1) vishaya vritti
(objective) and (2) atma vritti (subjective). The first must give
place to the second.
That is the aim of abhyasa (practice), which takes one first to the
puriashtaka and then to the One Self.
Talk 630.
In the course of conversation a devotee said in passing: Sivaprakasam
Pillai, who is such a good man, such an ardent devotee and a
longstanding disciple, has written a poem saying that Sri Bhagavan’s
instructions could not be carried out by him effectively in practice.
What can be the lot of others then?
M.: Sri Acharya also says similar things when he composes songs in
praise of any deity. How else can they praise God?
Saying this Sri Bhagavan smiled.
Talk 631.
The Sadhaka repeated his question in a different way:
D.: The enquiry into the Self seems to lead to the ativahika, the
puriashtaka or the jivatma. Is it right?
M.: Yes. It is called ‘sarira’ (body or abode, city or individual, puri
or jiva according to the outlook). They are the same.

Vritti-jnanam is usually associated with objective phenomena.
When these cease there remains the atma-vritti or the subjective
vritti that is the same as jnanam. Without it ajnanam will not cease.
The puriashtaka also will not be found associated with anything
outside, and the Self will shine forth uniform and harmonious.

Talk 632.
18th February, 1939
Mr. Satyanarayana Rao, a teacher in Vellore Mahant School, is a well-known
devotee of Sri Maharshi. He has been ailing from a cancer of
the gullet and the doctors have no hopes for him. He has been given
a room in the Asramam and the Sarvadhikari is very kind to him. It
is now about two months and the patient is very weak.
At about 9 a.m., Sri Bhagavan was reading the tapals. The brother
of the patient appeared in the hall with an anxious look to ask Sri
Bhagavan about the patient, who was gasping. The Sarvadhikari also
came to the hall on behalf of the sufferer. Sri Bhagavan continued to
read the tapals. In a few minutes another devotee also came there for
the same purpose. Sri Bhagavan asked: Did you call the doctor?
D.: Yes, but he is too busy in the hospital.
M.: What can I do? (After a short time) They will be pleased if I go
there.
Soon Bhagavan left the hall and went to the patient’s side, massaged
him gently and placed His hand on the heart and the other on his
head. The patient, whose tongue was protruding, mouth open and
eyes fixed, showed signs of relief and in about twenty minutes
gently murmured, “Oh Help of the helpless, how I have troubled
Thee! What return can I make for this kindness?” The people felt
relieved. Sri Bhagavan returned to the hall. Someone offered soap
and water to Sri Bhagavan to wash his hands. But he declined them
and rubbed His hands over His body. However the patient passed
away a few days later.
A well-known devotee remarked: “Sri Bhagavan appears so
unconcerned under all circumstances. But He is all along so loving
and gracious.”

Talk 633.
23rd February, 1939
A visitor from Dindigul said: I suffer in both mind and body. From the
day of my birth I have never had happiness. My mother too suffered
from the time she conceived me, I hear. Why do I suffer thus? I have
not sinned in this life. Is all this due to the sins of past lives?
M.: If there should be unrelieved suffering all the time, who would
seek happiness? That is, if suffering be the natural state, how can
the desire to be happy arise at all? However the desire does arise.
So to be happy is natural; all else is unnatural. Suffering is not
desired, only because it comes and goes.
The questioner repeated his complaint.
M.: You say the mind and body suffer. But do they ask the questions?
Who is the questioner? Is it not the one that is beyond both mind
and body?
You say the body suffers in this life; the cause of this is the previous
life: its cause is the one before it, and so on. So, like the case of
the seed and the sprout, there is no end to the causal series. It has
to be said that all the lives have their first cause in ignorance. That
same ignorance is present even now, framing this question. That
ignorance must be removed by jnanam.
“Why and to whom did this suffering come?” If you question
thus you will find that the ‘I’ is separate from the mind and body,
that the Self is the only eternal being, and that It is eternal bliss.
That is jnanam.
D.: But why should there be suffering now?
M.: If there were no suffering how could the desire to be happy
arise? If that desire did not arise how would the Quest of the Self
be successful?
D.: Then is all suffering good?
M.: Quite so. What is happiness? Is it a healthy and handsome body,
timely meals, and the like? Even an emperor has troubles without
end though he may be healthy. So all suffering is due to the false
notion “I am the body”. Getting rid of it is jnanam.

Talk 634.
An Andhra gentleman, retired from Government Service, asked: “I have
been doing omkara upasana for long. In the left ear I am always hearing
a sound. It is like the piping of a nadasvaram (pipe). Even now I hear it.
Some luminous visions are also seen. I do not know what I should do.”
M.: There must be one to hear sounds or see visions. That one is the
‘I’. If you seek it, asking “Who am I?” the subject and objects would
coalesce. After that there is no quest. Till then thought will arise, things
will appear and disappear; you ask yourself what has happened, and
what will happen. If the subject be known then the objects will merge
in the subject. If without that knowledge, one applies the mind to
objects, because these objects appear and disappear, and one does not
know that one’s true nature is that which remains over as the Self. On
the vanishing of objects, fear arises. That is, the mind being bound
to objects there is suffering when the objects are absent. But they are
transient and the Self is eternal. If the eternal Self be known subject
and object merge into one, and the One without a second will shine.
D.: Is there the merger of the Omkara?
M.: Om is the eternal truth. That which remains over after the
disappearance of objects is Om. It does not merge in anything. It
is the State of which it is said: “Where one sees none other, hears
none other, knows none other, that is Perfection.” Yatra nanyat
pasyati, nanyat srunoti, nanyat vijanati sa bhuma? All the upasanas
are ways to winning it. One must not get stuck in the upasanas,
but must query “Who am I?” and find the Self.
D.: I have no pleasure in the house. There remains nothing for me to
do in the family. I have finished doing what I had to do. Now there
are grandsons and granddaughters. May I remain in the house, or
should I leave it and go away?
M.: You should stay just where you are now. But where are you now?
Are you in the house, or is the house in you? Is there any house
apart from you? If you get fixed in your own place, you will see all
things have merged into you, and there will be no cause for such
questions as these.
D.: Yes. Then it seems as if I may remain at home.
M.: You must remain in your real state.

Talk 635.
An Andhra gentleman of Hospet has returned from pilgrimage to
Kailas, Amarnath, etc. He described how fine those places are and how
difficult the journey was. He finally asked for something to remind
him of Maharshi, meaning some instruction.
M.: You have been to Kailas etc. Have you been to Muktinath?
D.: No. It was too difficult a journey for me. I have however been in
Nepal. Have you been to those places?
M.: No, no. I mentioned Muktinath casually.
Then Sri Bhagavan remarked: “To go to Kailas and return is just a
new birth. For there the body-idea drops off.”
Talk 636.
Mrs. Kelly Hack asked if the waking and the dream states might be
imagined to be excursions from the natural state of the Self.
M.: There must be a place for excursions. The place must also lie
outside oneself. It is not possible in the true nature of the Self.
D.: But I meant that it might be imagined to be so.
M.: One might as well imagine the true nature of the Self
D.: The illustration of the screen is very beautiful.
M.: The cinema screen is not sentient and so requires a seer, whereas
the screen of the Self includes the seer and the seen - rather, it is
full of light.
The pictures of the cinema-show cannot be seen without the help of
darkness, for you cannot have a show in broad daylight. Similarly,
the mind thinks thoughts and sees objects owing to an underlying
ignorance (avidya). The Self is pure knowledge, pure light where
there is no duality. Duality implies ignorance. The Knowledge of the
Self is beyond relative knowledge and ignorance, the Light of the Self
is beyond the ordinary light and darkness. The Self is all alone.
Talk 637.
There was some question about progress.
Sri Bhagavan said that progress is for the mind and not for the Self.
The Self is ever perfect.

Talk 638.
2nd March, 1939
For the last few days a rule is in force by which the visitors are not
allowed to enter the hall between 12 noon and 2-30 p.m. A few Muslim
visitors came to the Asramam in the interval today. The attendant
promptly told them that they should not disturb Sri Bhagavan’s rest at
this hour. Sri Bhagavan quietly got down from the sofa and came out
of the hall; He sat on the stone pavement adjoining the wall and asked
the visitors also to sit close to Him. He went on reading a newspaper
and also laid Himself on the stone. He was finally requested to go in.
Talk 639.
While speaking to Mr. K. L. Sarma of Pudukotah, Sri Bhagavan said:
Leaving out what is intimate and immediate, why should one seek the
rest? The scriptures say “That Thou art”. In this statement ‘Thou’ is
directly experienced; but leaving it out they go on seeking ‘That’!
D.: In order to find the oneness of ‘That’ and of ‘Thou’.
M.: ‘Thou’ is the Inner Self immanent in all; in order to find the same, he
leaves himself out and sees the world objectively. What is the world?
What is Immanent in it? It is ‘That’. All such ideas arise only on forgetting
one’s own Self. I never bothered myself with such matters. Only after a
time it occurred to me that men had investigated such matters.

Talk 640.
3rd March, 1939
At about 4 p.m. Sri Bhagavan, who was writing something intently,
turned His eyes slowly towards the window to the north; He closed
the fountain pen with the cap and put it in its case: He closed the
notebook and put it aside; He removed the spectacles, folded them
in the case and left them aside. He leaned back a little, looked up
overhead, turned His face this way and that; and looked here and
there. He passed His hand over His face and looked contemplative.
Then He turned to someone in the hall and said softly:
M.: The pair of sparrows just came here and complained to me that
their nest had been removed. I looked up and found their nest

missing.” Then He called for the attendant, Madhava Swami, and
asked: “Madhava, did anyone remove the sparrows’ nest?
The attendant, who walked in leisurely, answered with an air of
unconcern: “I removed the nests as often as they were built. I
removed the last one this very afternoon.”
M.: That’s it. That is why the sparrows complained. The poor little
ones! How they take the pieces of straw and shreds in their tiny
beaks and struggle to build their nests!
Attendant: But, why should they build here, over our heads?
M.: Well - well. Let us see who succeeds in the end (After a short
time Sri Bhagavan went out).
Talk 641.
Explaining the opening stanza of the Sad Vidya, Sri Bhagavan
observed: The world is always apparent to everyone. All must know
“I and this world exist”. On enquiry “do these always exist?” and
“if indeed real, they must remain even unrelated to time, space and
differentiation; are they so?” It is evident that only in the waking and
dream states these are perceived but not in deep sleep. Therefore ‘I’
and the world appear sometimes and disappear also. They are created,
have their being and later vanish. Whence do they arise? Wherein do
they remain? Where do they go on vanishing from view? Can such
phenomena be admitted to be real?
Furthermore, I and the world, objects of creation, sustenance and
destruction, are perceived in the waking and dream states only and not
in deep sleep. How does deep sleep differ from the other two states?
In sleep there are no thoughts whereas in the other two states there
are. There the thoughts must be the origin of the ‘I’ and the world.
Now what about thoughts? They cannot be natural; otherwise they
cannot appear at one moment and disappear at another. Wherefrom
do they arise? Their source, ever-present and not subject to variations,
must be admitted to be. It must be the eternal state as said in the
upadesa mantra - That from which all beings come forth, that in
which they remain and that into which they resolve.
This stanza is not in praise or adoration but only an expression of
the Reality.

Talk 642.
Mr. K. L. Sarma asked:
Svasvarupanusandhanam bhaktirityabhidhiyate.
Again - Svatmatattvanusadhanam bhaktirityapare joguh.
What is the difference between the two?
M.: The former is vichara - Who am I? (Koham?) It represents jnana.
The latter is dhyana - Whence am I? (Kutoham?) This admits a
jivatma which seeks the Paramatma.
Talk 643.
An elderly, learned Andhra asked: “Are the two methods Karma marga
and jnana marga separate and independent of each other? Or is the
Karma marga only a preliminary which after successful practice
should be followed by jnana marga for the consummation of the aim?
The Karma advocates non-attachment to action and yet an active life,
whereas the jnana means renunciation. What is the true meaning of
renunciation? Subjugation of lust, passion, greed, etc., is common
to all and forms the essential preliminary step for any course. Does
not freedom from passions indicate renunciation? Or is renunciation
different, meaning cessation of the active life? These questions are
troubling me and I beg lights to be thrown on those doubts.”
Bhagavan smiled and said: “You have said all. Your question contains
the answer also. Freedom from passions is the essential requisite.
When that is accomplished all else is accomplished.”
D.: Sri Sankara emphasises the jnana marga and renunciation as
preliminary to it. But there are clearly two methods dwividha
mentioned in the Gita. They are Karma and Jnana (Lokesmin
dwividha nishtha...).
M.: Sri Acharya has commented on the Gita and on that passage also.
D.: The Gita seems to emphasise Karma. For Arjuna is persuaded
to fight; Sri Krishna Himself set the example by an active life of
great exploits.
M.: The Gita starts saying that you are not the body, that you are not
therefore the karta.
D.: What is the significance?

M.: That one should act without thinking that oneself is the actor.
The actions go on despite his egolessness. The person has come
into manifestation for a certain purpose. That purpose will be
accomplished whether he considers himself the actor or not.
D.: What is Karma yoga? Is it non-attachment to Karma or its fruit?
M.: Karma yoga is that yoga in which the person does not arrogate
to himself the function of being the actor. The actions go on
automatically.
D.: Is it the non-attachment to the fruits of actions?
M.: The question arises only if there is the actor. It is being all along
said that you should not consider yourself the actor.
D.: So Karma yoga is kartrtva buddhi rahita karma - action without
the sense of doership.
M.: Yes. Quite so.
D.: The Gita teaches active life from beginning to end.
M.: Yes, the actor-less action.
D.: Is it then necessary to leave the home and lead a life of renunciation?
M.: Is the home in you? Or are you in the home?
D.: It is in my mind.
M.: Then what becomes of you when you leave the physical
environment?
D.: Now I see. Renunciation is only action without the sense of being
the karta.
Is there not action for a jivanmukta?
M.: Who raises the question? Is he a jivanmukta or another?
D.: Not a jivanmukta.
M.: Let the question be raised after jivanmukti is gained if it is
found necessary. Mukti is admitted to be freedom from the mental
activities also. Can a mukta think of action?
D.: Even if he gives up the action, the action will not leave him. Is
it not so?
M.: With what is he identified in order that this question might apply?
D.: Yes, I see all right. My doubts are now cleared.

Talk 644.
A District Official, a Muslim: What is the necessity for reincarnation?
M.: Let us first see if there is incarnation before we speak of
reincarnation.
D.: How?
M.: Are you now incarnated that you speak of reincarnation?
D.: Yes. Certainly. An amoeba developed into higher organisms until
the human being has been evolved. This is now the perfection in
development. Why should there be further reincarnation?
M.: Who is to set limits to this theory of evolution?
D.: Physically it is perfect. But for the soul, further development may
be required which will happen after the death of the man.
M.: Who is the man? Is he the body or the soul?
D.: Both put together.
M.: Do you not exist in the absence of the body?
D.: How do you mean? It is impossible.
M.: What was your state in deep sleep?
D.: Sleep is temporary death. I was unconscious and therefore I cannot
say what the state was.
M.: But you existed in sleep. Did you not?
D.: In sleep the soul leaves the body and goes out somewhere. Then it
returns to the body before waking. It is therefore temporary death.
M.: A man who is dead never returns to say that he died, whereas the
man who had slept says that he slept.
D.: Because this is temporary death.
M.: If death is temporary and life is temporary, what is it that is real?
D.: What is meant by the question?
M.: If life and death be temporary, there must be something which is
not temporary. Reality is that which is not temporary.
D.: There is nothing real. Everything is temporary. Everything is maya.
M.: On what does maya appear?
D.: Now I see you; it is all maya.
M.: If everything is maya, how does any question arise?
D.: Why should there be reincarnation?

M.: For whom?
D.: For the perfect human being.
M.: If you are perfect, why do you fear to be reborn? It indicates
imperfection.
D.: Not that I fear. But you say that I must be reborn.
M.: Who says it? You are asking the question.
D.: What I mean is this. You are a Perfect Being; I am a sinner. You tell
me that I being a sinner must be reborn in order to perfect myself?
M.: No, I do not say so. On the other hand I say that you have no birth
and therefore no death.
D.: Do you mean to say that I was not born?
M.: Yes, you are now thinking that you are the body and therefore
confuse yourself with its birth and death. But you are not the body
and you have no birth and death.
D.: Do you not uphold the theory of rebirth?
M.: No. On the other hand, I want to remove your confusion that you
will be reborn. It is you who think that you will be reborn.
See for whom this question arises. Unless the questioner is found,
the questions can never be set at rest.
D.: This is no answer to my question.
M.: On the other hand, this is the answer to elucidate the point and
all other doubts as well.
D.: This will not satisfy all others.
M.: Leave others alone. If you take care of yourself others can take
care of themselves.
Silence followed. He left in a few minutes apparently dissatisfied
with the discourse.
Sri Bhagavan said after a few minutes: This will work in him. The
discourse will have its effect.
He does not admit any Reality. Well - who is it that has determined
everything to be unreal? Otherwise the determination also
becomes unreal.
The theory of evolution is enlarged upon by the person in this state.
Where is it, if not in his mind?

To say that the soul must be perfected after death, the soul must be
admitted to exist. Therefore the body is not the person. It is the soul.
To explain evolution Sri Bhagavan continued:
One sees an edifice in his dream. It rises up all of a sudden. Then
he begins to think how it should have been already built brick by
brick by so many labourers during such a long time. Yet he does
not see the builders working. So also with the theory of evolution.
Because he finds himself a man he thinks that he has developed to
that stage from the primal state of the amoeba.
Another devotee: It is an illustration of the saying that he sees the
universe full of cause and effect Visram pasyati karyakaranataya.
M.: Yes. The man always traces an effect to a cause, there must be a
cause for the cause, the argument becomes interminable. Relating
the effect to a cause makes the man think. He is finally driven to
consider who he is himself. When he knows the Self there is Perfect
Peace. It is for that consummation that man is evolved.
Later in the evening, another devotee said to Sri Bhagavan that the
Muslim official continued to speak of the same topic to the Municipal
Commissioner.
Then Sri Bhagavan said: He says that body and soul together form
the man. But I ask what is the state of the man in deep sleep. The
body is not aware whereas the man is there all along.
D.: But he says that sleep is temporary death.
M.: Yes, so he says. But he qualifies the word death by the word
temporary, so that the man returns to the body. How does he find the
body to re-enter it? Moreover, he is sure to return. That means that he
must exist to return to the body or to claim the body for himself.
The scriptures however say that the prana protects the body in
sleep. For when the body lies on the floor, a wolf or a tiger may
feed on it. The animal sniffs and feels that there is life within and
therefore does not feed on it as on a corpse. That again shows that
there is someone in the body to protect it in deep sleep.
General remarks by Sri Bhagavan:
All knowledge is meant only to lead the person to the realisation
of the Self. The scriptures or religions are well-known to be for

that purpose. What do they all mean? Leave alone what they say of
the past or of the future; for it is only speculative. But the present
existence is within the experience of all. Realise the pure Being.
There is an end to all discourses and disputes.
But the intellect of man does not easily take to this course. It is only
rarely that a man becomes introverted. The intellect delights in
investigating the past and the future but does not look to the present.
D.: Because it must lose itself if it sank within in search of the Self.
But the other investigation gives it not only a lease of life but also
food for growth.
M.: Yes. Quite so. Why is intellect developed? It has a purpose. The
purpose is that it should show the way to realise the Self. It must
be put to that use.

Talk 645.
12th March, 1939
A man of about 30, of good appearance came to the hall with a few
companions. The man abruptly began: “To say ‘I-I’ cannot help anyone
to reach the goal. How can ‘I’ be pointed out?”
M.: It must be found within. It is not an object so that it may be shown
by one to another.
D.: When the instruction to find the ‘I’ is given, the instruction must
be made complete by showing what it is.
M.: The instruction here amounts to direction only. It depends on the
seeker to use the direction.
D.: The seeker is ignorant and seeks instruction.
M.: He is therefore guided to find the Truth.
D.: But it is not enough. The ‘I’ must be pointed out specifically.
The man assumed an aggressive attitude and did not listen. Sri Bhagavan
tried to explain, but he would not allow Sri Bhagavan to do so.
Finally Sri Bhagavan said: This is not the attitude of the seeker.
When someone teaches humility to the seeker, he will reach the
way and not till then.
The chanting of the Vedas began.

The conversation was casually referred to by a devotee present.
Sri Bhagavan again said: The seeker must listen and try to understand.
If on the other hand he wants to prove me, let him do so by all
means. I do not argue.
The man again began: “My attitude was not properly understood. I
want to know the ‘I’. It must be pointed out to me.”
But he displayed considerable malice. The others did not like it and so
tried to bring him round. He became worse. Sri Bhagavan finally said: “Go
back the way you came. Do it externally or internally, as it suits you.”
The man grew excited and others also were equally excited. He was
finally led out of the hall and sent away.
Later it was learnt that the man was an adherent of yoga and that he used
to abuse all other methods. He used to vilify jnana and the jnanis.
At night, after supper, Sri Bhagavan spoke of one Govinda Yogi, a
Malayali Brahmin pandit of some repute, who used to extol yoga and
vilify the other methods. He always cited the Gita, the Upanishads,
etc., to support his statements. Others, e.g., Sri Narayana Guru, used
to refute him on the same grounds.
Later Sri Bhagavan spoke appreciating the amiability of Amritanatha. He
is a great tapasvi, who had made considerable japa. He had fed the poor
on many occasions in many places. He could easily gain the goodwill of
others including great men like Sir P. Ramanathan and Pandit Malaviya.

Talk 646.
13th March, 1939
Sri Bhagavan referred to the following passage of Gandhiji in the
Harijan of the 11th instant:
“How mysterious are the ways of God! This journey to Rajkot is
a wonder even to me. Why am I going, whither am I going? What
for? I have thought nothing about these things. And if God guides
me, what should I think, why should I think? Even thought may
be an obstacle in the way of His guidance.
“The fact is, it takes no effort to stop thinking. The thoughts do not
come. Indeed there is no vacuum - but I mean to say that there is
no thought about the mission.”

Sri Bhagavan remarked how true the words were and emphasised each
statement in the extract. Then He cited Thayumanavar in support of
the state which is free from thoughts:
“Although I had often heard that all the Srutis declare the state of
stillness to be one of Bliss, all Bliss - yet I continued to be ignorant.
Again I did not follow the advice of my Lord - the Silent Master
- because of my folly. I wandered in the forest of illusion: alas! it
was my fate.”
“Bliss will reveal itself if one is still. Why then is this illusory yoga
practice? Can it (i.e., Bliss) be revealed by directing the intellect in
a particular way? Do not say so, you who are given to the practice
and are therefore an innocent babe.”
“The eternal Being is that state where you have disappeared. Are
you not in it too? You, who cannot speak of it, do not be perplexed.
Although you do not manifest, yet you are not lost. For you are eternal
and also still. Do not be in pain. Here is Bliss - come on!”

Talk 647.
15th March, 1939
D.: Is not what Gandhiji describes, the state in which thoughts
themselves become foreign?
M.: Yes, It is only after the rise of the ‘I’ thought that all other thoughts
arise. The world is seen after you have felt “I am”. The ‘I-thought’
and all other thoughts had vanished for him.
D.: Then the body-sense must be absent in that state.
M.: The body-sense also is a thought whereas he describes the state
in which “thoughts do not come”.
D.: He also says, “It takes no effort to stop thinking”.
M.: Of course no effort is necessary to stop thoughts whereas one is
necessary for bringing about thoughts.
D.: We are trying to stop thoughts. Gandhiji also says that thought is
an obstacle to God’s guidance. So it is the natural state. Though
natural, yet how difficult to realise. They say that sadhanas are
necessary and also that they are obstacles. We get confused.

M.: Sadhanas are needed so long as one has not realised it. They are
for putting an end to obstacles. Finally there comes a stage when
a person feels helpless notwithstanding the sadhanas. He is unable
to pursue the much-cherished sadhana also. It is then that God’s
Power is realised. The Self reveals itself.
D.: If the state is natural, why does it not overcome the unnatural
phases and assert itself over the rest?
M.: Is there anything besides that? Does anyone see anything besides
the Self? One is always aware of the Self. So It is always Itself.
D.: It is said, because It shines forth, It is directly perceived. I
understand from it that It becomes pratyaksha (directly perceived),
because It is pradeepta (shining). Since it is not realised by us, I
take it to be not shining. It is only pradeepta (shining), and hence
admits of obstacles and goes under them. If the atma becomes
prakarshena deepta, (very shining) it will shine over the rest. So
it seems to be necessary to make it shine more.
M.: How can it be so? The Atma cannot be dull at one moment and
blazing at another. It is unchanging and uniform.
D.: But Chudala says to Sikhidhvaja that she simply helped to trim
the wick.
M.: That refers to nididhyasana.
By sravana, Knowledge dawns. That is the flame.
By manana, the Knowledge is not allowed to vanish. Just as the
flame is protected by a wind-screen, so the other thoughts are not
allowed to overwhelm the right knowledge.
By nididhyasana, the flame is kept up to burn bright by trimming
the wick. Whenever other thoughts arise, the mind is turned inward
to the light of true knowledge.
When this becomes natural, it is samadhi. The enquiry “Who
am I?” is the sravana. The ascertainment of the true import of
‘I’ is the manana. The practical application on each occasion is
nididhyasana. Being as ‘I’ is samadhi.
D.: Although we have heard it so often and so constantly yet we are
unable to put the teaching into practise successfully. It must be due
to weakness of mind. Is it possible that one’s age is a bar?

M.: The mind is commonly said to be strong if it can think furiously.
But here the mind is strong if it is free from thoughts. The yogis
say that realisation can be had only before the age of thirty, but not
the jnanis. For jnana does not cease to exist with age.
It is true that in the Yoga Vasishta, Vasishta says to Rama in the
Vairagya Prakarana “You have this dispassion in your youth. It
is admirable.” But he did not say that jnana cannot be had in old
age. There is nothing to prevent it in old age.
The sadhak must remain as the Self. If he cannot do so, he must
ascertain the true meaning of the ‘I’ and constantly revert to it
whenever other thoughts arise. That is the practice.
Some say that one must know the ‘tat’ because the idea of the
world constantly arises to deflect the mind. If the Reality behind
it is first ascertained it will be found to be Brahman. The ‘tvam’ is
understood later. It is the jiva. Finally there will be jivabrahmaikya
(union of the two).
But why all this? Can the world exist apart from the Self? The ‘I’ is always
Brahman. Its identity need not be established by logic and practice. It is
enough that one realises the Self. It is always the Brahman.
According to the other school, nididhyasana will be the thought
Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman). That is diversion of thought
to Brahman. No diversion should be allowed. Know the Self and
there is an end of it.
No long process is necessary to know the Self. Is it to be pointed
out by another? Does not everyone know that he exists? Even in
utter darkness when he cannot see his hand, he answers a call and
says “I am here”.
D.: But that ‘I’ is the ego or the ‘I-thought’ and it is not the Absolute
Self that answers the call or is otherwise aware of oneself.
M.: Even the ego can become aware of itself in the absence of light,
sight, etc. Much more so should be the Pure Light of the Self.
I am saying that the Self is self-evident. One need not discuss the
tattvas to find the Self. Some say there are twenty-four tattvas,
others more and so on. Should we know the tattvas, before we admit
the existence of the Self? The sastras dilate upon them in order to

point out that the Self is untouched by them. But for the seeker he
can straightaway admit the Self and try to be That, without having
recourse to the study of the tattvas.
D.: Gandhiji adhered to satya (Truth) so long and won realisation
of the Self.
M.: What is satya except the Self? Satya is that which is made up of sat.
Again sat is nothing but the Self. So Gandhiji’s satya is only the Self.
Each one knows the Self but is yet ignorant. The person is enabled
to realise only after hearing the mahavakya. Hence the Upanishadic
text is the eternal Truth to which everyone who has realised owes
his experience. After hearing the Self to be the Brahman the person
finds the true import of the Self and reverts to it whenever he is
diverted from it. Here is the whole process of Realisation.

Talk 648.
17th March, 1939
Sri Bhagavan said that Tatva Rayar was the first to pour forth
Advaita philosophy in Tamil.
He had said that the Earth was his bed, his hands were his plates
for taking food, the loin cloth was his clothing and thus there was
no want for him.
In Maharaja Turavu (the renunciation of the king) he says: He was
seated on the bare ground, the earth was his seat, the mind was the
chamara; the sky was the canopy; and renunciation was his spouse:
Then Sri Bhagavan continued: I had no cloth spread on the floor in
earlier days. I used to sit on the floor and lie on the ground. That
is freedom. The sofa is a bondage. It is a gaol for me. I am not
allowed to sit where and how I please. Is it not bondage?
One must be free to do as one pleases, and should not be served
by others.
‘No want’ is the greatest bliss. It can be realised only by experience.
Even an emperor is no match for a man with no want. The emperor
has got vassals under him. But the other man is not aware of anyone
beside the Self. Which is better?

Talk 649.
18th March, 1939
Mr. Thompson, a very quiet young gentleman who is staying in India for
some years and studying Hindu Philosophy as an earnest student, asked:
Srimad Bhagavad Gita says: “I am the prop for Brahman.” In another
place, it says: “I am in the heart of each one.” Thus the different
aspects of the Ultimate Principle are revealed. I take it that there are
three aspects, namely (1) the transcendental (2) the immanent and
(3) the cosmic. Is Realisation to be in any one of these or in all of
them? Coming to the transcendental from the cosmic, the Vedanta
discards the names and forms as being maya. But I cannot readily
appreciate it because a tree means the trunk, branches, leaves, etc.
I cannot dismiss the leaves as maya. Again the Vedanta also says
that the whole is Brahman as illustrated by gold and ornaments of
gold. How are we to understand the Truth?
M.: The Gita says: Brahmano hi pratishtaham. If that ‘aham’ is
known, the whole is known.
D.: It is the immanent aspect only.
M.: You now think that you are an individual, there is the universe and
that God is beyond the cosmos. So there is the idea of separateness.
This idea must go. For God is not separate from you or the cosmos.
The Gita also says:
The Self am I, O Lord of Sleep,
In every creature’s heart enshrined.
The rise and noon of every form,
I am its final doom as well.
B. G., X. 20.
Thus God is not only in the heart of all, He is the prop of all, He
is the source of all, their abiding place and their end. All proceed
from Him, have their stay in Him, and finally resolve into Him.
Therefore He is not separate.
D.: How are we to understand this passage in the Gita:
“This whole cosmos forms a particle of Me.”
M.: It does not mean that a small particle of God separates from Him
and forms the Universe. His Sakti is acting; as a result of one phase of

such activity the cosmos has become manifest. Similarly, the statement
in Purusha Sukta, “All the beings form His one foot (Padosya viswa
bhutani) does not mean that Brahman is in four parts.
D.: I understand it. Brahman is certainly not divisible.
M.: So the fact is that Brahman is all and remains indivisible. He is
ever realised. The man does not however know it. He must know
it. Knowledge means the overcoming of obstacles which obstruct
the revelation of the Eternal Truth that the Self is the same as
Brahman. The obstacles form altogether your idea of separateness
as an individual. Therefore the present attempt will result in the
truth being revealed that the Self is not separate from Brahman.

Talk 650.
22nd March, 1939
An Andhra gentleman of middle age asked Sri Bhagavan how he
should make his japa.
M.: The japa contains the word namah. It means that state in which
the mind does not manifest apart from the Self. When the state is
accomplished there will be an end of the japa. For the doer disappears
and so also the action. The Eternal Being is alone left. Japa should
be made until that state is reached. There is no escape from the Self.
The doer will be automatically drawn into it. When once it is done
the man cannot do anything else but remain merged in the Self.
D.: Will bhakti lead to mukti?
M.: Bhakti is not different from mukti. Bhakti is being as the Self
(Swarupa). One is always that. He realises it by the means he
adopts. What is bhakti? To think of God. That means: only one
thought prevails to the exclusion of all other thoughts. That thought
is of God which is the Self or it is the Self surrendered unto God.
When He has taken you up nothing will assail you. The absence
of thoughts is bhakti. It is also mukti.
The jnana method is said to be vichara (enquiry). That is nothing but
‘supreme devotion’ (parabhakti). The difference is in words only.
You think that bhakti is meditation on the Supreme Being. So long
as there is vibhakti (the sense of separateness), bhakti (reunion)

is sought. The process will lead to the ultimate goal as is said in
Srimad Bhagavad Gita:
arto jignasuh artharthi jnani cha Bharatarshabha
tesham jnani nityayukta ekabhaktir visishyate
— Ch. VII (l6, 17).

Any kind of meditation is good. But if the sense of separateness is lost and
the object of meditation or the subject who meditates is alone left behind
without anything else to know, it is jnana. Jnana is said to be ekabhakti
(single-minded devotion). The Jnani is the finality because he has
become the Self and there is nothing more to do. He is also perfect
and so fearless, dwitiyat vai bhayam bhavati - only the existence of
a second gives rise to fear. This is mukti. It is also bhakti.

Talk 651.
23rd March, 1939
A. W. Chadwick is copying the English translation of the Tamil Kaivalya
Navaneeta. When he came across some technical terms in it and felt
some difficulty in understanding them, he asked Sri Bhagavan about
them. Sri Bhagavan said: “Those portions deal with theories of creation.
They are not material because the Srutis do not mean to set forth such
theories. They mention the theories casually so that the enquirer may
please himself if he be so inclined. The truth is that the world appears
as a passing shadow in a flood of light. Light is necessary to see that
shadow also. The shadow does not deserve any special notice, analysis
or discussion. The book deals with the Self and that is its purpose. The
discussions on creation may be omitted for the present.”
Later, Sri Bhagavan continued: “The Vedanta says that the cosmos
springs into view simultaneously with the seer. There is no detailed
process of creation. This is said to be yugapat srshti (instantaneous
creation). It is quite similar to the creations in dream where the
experiencer springs up simultaneously with the objects of experience.
When this is told, some people are not satisfied for they are so rooted
in objective knowledge. They seek to find out how there can be sudden
creation. They argue that an effect must be preceded by a cause. In
short, they desire an explanation for the existence of the world which

they see around them. Then the Srutis try to satisfy their curiosity by
such theories of creation. This method of dealing with the subject of
creation is called krama srshti (gradual creation). But the true seeker
can be content with yugapat srshti - instantaneous creation.”

Talk 652.
24th March, 1939
A certain person had composed verses in praise of Sri Bhagavan. Therein the
word Avartapuri occurs. Sri Bhagavan said that it means Tiruchuzhi, the
birth place of Sri Bhagavan. The place goes by different names. Avarta
chuzhi an eddy. There had been several deluges. God Siva had saved this
place from three of them. On one occasion when the whole land surface
was immersed in the waters, Siva planted His spear in that place. All the
waters, which would have otherwise flooded it, were drawn into that hole.
Then an eddy was formed. Hence the name. Again in another deluge, He
held the place aloft on the top of the spear. Hence, Soolapuri.
Mother Earth was carried away by Hiranyaksha into the waters.
When recovered by Vishnu she felt that she had papasparsa by that
Rakshasa. As an expiation of that impure touch she worshipped Siva
in that place. Hence, Bhuminathesvara Kshetra.
Gautama is prominent in Arunachala as well as in Tiruchuzhi. Shiva
showed Himself to the saint in the dancing posture and also re-enacted
the wedding of Gauri Sankar.
Kaundinya was another rishi for whose sake the sacred river began to
flow there. It goes by the name of the rishi i.e., Kaundinya river which
in Tamil was corrupted into Kundaru. It is otherwise called Papahari i.e.,
the destroyer of sins. There lies a story behind it: A King’s daughter was
hysterical (i.e., possessed). She was taken on a pilgrimage to various
sacred places and tirthas. On one occasion the party heard the name of
Papahari as a tirtha in a sankalpa before bathing. They enquired where
the tirtha was and went to Tiruchuzhi. The girl was bathed in that water
and thus made free from the spirit.
The Pandya king also got free from brahmahatya in this place. It
happens to be the centre of the Pandya Kingdom, which comprised
the Madura, Ramnad and Tirunelveli Districts.

The village had a sacred tank in front of the temple, which was the
spot of the eddy created by the spear of Siva. Even now the waters in
the tank rise at the rate of about a foot every day for ten consecutive
days preceding the full moon in the Tamil month Masi (Maghasuddha
Pournami) and then gradually fall during the succeeding ten days.
This phenomenon can be observed every year. It is noted with wonder
by the young ones of the village. Pilgrims gather to bathe in those
waters on that occasion. That water is sulphurous for the silver jewels
of the bathers become dark after bathing in it. Sri Bhagavan said he
had noted it when He was a boy.
The village has the river on one side and a huge lake on the other
side. The bund of the lake is clayey and runs about three miles in all.
The lake is strangely enough twenty feet over the level of the village.
Even when it is over-full, the waters escape in other directions leaving
the village unaffected.

Talk 653.
1st April, 1939
Some teachers who attended the Teachers’ Guild meeting in the town
came on a visit to the hall. One of them asked Sri Bhagavan: “I seem
to be wandering in a forest because I do not find the way.”
M.: This idea of being in a forest must go. It is such ideas which are
at the root of the trouble.
D.: But I do not find the way.
M.: Where is the forest and where is the way unless they are in you?
You are as you are and yet you speak of a forest and ways.
D.: But I am obliged to move in society.
M.: Society is also an idea similar to that of the forest.
D.: I leave my home and go and mix in society.
M.: Who does it?
D.: The body moves and does all.
M.: Quite so. Now that you identify yourself with the body you feel
the trouble. The trouble is in your mind. You think that you are the
body or that you are the mind. But there are occasions when you

are free from both. For example in deep slumber, you create a body
and a world in your dream. That represents your mental activities.
In your waking state you think that you are the body and then the
idea of forest and the rest arise.
Now, consider the situation. You are an unchanging and continuous
being who remains in all these states which are constantly changing
and therefore transient. But you are always there. It follows that these
fleeting objects are mere phenomena which appear on your being like
pictures which move across a screen. The screen does not move when
the picture moves. Similarly, you do not move from where you are
even when the body leaves the home and mixes in society.
Your body, the society, the forest and the ways are all in you; you are
not in them. You are the body also but not this body only. If you remain
as your pure Self, the body and its movements need not affect you.
D.: This can be realised only by the Grace of the master. I was reading
Sri Bhagavata; it says that Bliss can be had only by the dust of the
Master’s feet. I pray for Grace.
M.: What is Bliss but your own being? You are not apart from Being
which is the same as Bliss. You are now thinking that you are the
mind or the body which are both changing and transient. But you
are unchanging and eternal. That is what you should know.
D.: It is darkness and I am ignorant.
M.: This ignorance must go. Again, who says ‘I am ignorant’? He must
be the witness of ignorance. That is what you are. Socrates said, “I
know that I do not know.” Can it be ignorance? It is wisdom.
D.: Why then do I feel unhappy when I am in Vellore and feel peace
in Your Presence?
M.: Can this feeling in this place be Bliss? When you leave the place
you say you are unhappy. Therefore this peace is not permanent, nay
it is mixed with unhappiness which is felt in another place. Therefore
you cannot find Bliss in places and in periods of time. It must be
permanent in order that it may be useful. Such permanent being is
yourself. Be the Self and that is Bliss. You are always That.
You say that you left Vellore, travelled in the train, arrived in
Tiruvannamalai, entered the hall and found happiness. When you

go back you are not happy in Vellore. Now, do you really move
from place to place? Even considering you to be the body, the
body sits in a cart at the gate of the home, the cart moves on to the
railway station. Then it gets into a railway carriage which speeds
on from Vellore to Tiruvannamalai. There it gets into another cart
which brings the body here. Yet when you are asked, you say that
you travelled all the way from Vellore. Your body remains where
it was and all the places went past it.
Such ideas are due to the false identity which is so deep-rooted.
Another asked: Should we understand the world as transient (anitya)?
M.: Why so? Because you are now considering it to be permanent
(nitya) the Scriptures tell you that it is not so in order to wean
you from wrong ideas. This should be done by knowing yourself
to be eternal (nitya) and not by branding the world as transitory
(anitya).
D.: We are told to practise indifference (udasina) which is possible
only if the world is unreal.
M.: Yes. Oudasinyam abhipsitam. Indifference is advised. But what
is it? It is absence of love and hatred. When you realise the Self
on which these phenomena pass, will you love or hate them? That
is the meaning of indifference.
D.: That will lead to want of interest in our work. Should we do our
duty or not?
M.: Yes - certainly. Even if you try not to do your duty you will be
perforce obliged to do it. Let the body complete the task for which
it came into being.
Sri Krishna also says in the Gita, whether Arjuna liked it or not he
would be forced to fight. When there is work to be done by you,
you cannot keep away; nor can you continue to do a thing when
you are not required to do it, that is to say, when the work allotted
to you has been done. In short, the work will go on and you must
take your share in it - the share which is allotted to you.
D.: How is it to be done?
M.: Like an actor playing his part in a drama - free from love or hatred.
OM TAT SAT

